---
document_id: 108945-PCR-Contribution_à_la_sécurité_alimentaire_par_le_développement_d’agents_mycorhiziens_endémiques_en_Algérie[1]
document_name: 108945-PCR-Contribution_à_la_sécurité_alimentaire_par_le_développement_d’agents_mycorhiziens_endémiques_en_Algérie[1].pdf
original_format: .pdf
page_count: 9
chunk_count: 27
---

--- Page 0 ---

| Project Number and Name | 108945: Contribution à la sécurité alimentaire par le <br> développement d'agents mycorhiziens endémiques en <br> Algérie. |
| :-- | :-- |
| Responsible Officer | Marwan Owaygen |
| Former Responsible Officer | Yacine Boumghar (Canada) and Ali Aouabed (Algeria) |
| Recipient Institution (grantee) | Collège de Maisonneuve (Canada) and University <br> Saad Dahlab of Blida 1 (Algeria) |
| Location: Country | Algeria |
| Location: Region | MENA |
| Area of research impact | Food security |
| Internal Funding | 683100 CAD |
| External Funding |  |
| Project Start Date | 1 April 2019 |
| Project Completion Date | 1 July 2023 |
| Program theme sector | Agriculture and Food Security |
| Strategic framework indicator | Marwan Owaygen |
| Author | 26 June 2025 |
| Date of Report |  |

# Project Abstract 

L'Algérie a le double défi d'assurer la sécurité alimentaire pour sa population et d'atténuer la dégradation des ressources naturelles. C'est ainsi que le gouvernement algérien a lancé le programme de renouveau agricole et rural ayant parmi ses objectifs l'amélioration de la sécurité alimentaire à partir de la production nationale. Un des défis majeurs auxquels fait face l'agriculture algérienne est la fertilité des sols et leur capacité de rétention en eau. Les agriculteurs ont souvent recours à l'utilisation abusive d'intrants chimiques. Plusieurs études à l'échelle internationale ont démontré l'efficacité des mycorhizes lorsqu'elles sont utilisées comme agents biofertilisants dans la restauration de la fertilité des terres dégradées. Le principe de cette biofertilisation repose sur une symbiose entre le champignon (c'est-à-dire la mycorhize) et la plante hôte qui se développe au niveau des racines de cette dernière. Ce projet de recherche mené conjointement par un centre collégial canadien de transfert de technologie (Centre d'études des procédés chimiques de Québec/Collège de Maisonneuve) et une institution de recherche algérienne (l'Université Saad Dahlab de Blida 1) testera la mise en place d'une solution novatrice pour l'enrichissement des sols agricoles algériens. Le projet a pour objectif principal d'accroître la sécurité alimentaire, d'améliorer la productivité et d'augmenter les revenus des petits agriculteurs algériens à travers la conceptualisation, le pilotage et la dissémination des modèles d'affaire permettant à une bio-innovation (la mycorhization) d'être produite et adoptée à grande échelle en Algérie. La stratégie de déploiement vise à atteindre 5000 agriculteurs à la fin du projet qui sera implémenté sur 4 ans.

--- Page 1 ---

# 1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative? 

## A. Important results:

- The ultimate output of this project that paved the road for a potential impact at scale was the homologation of the innovation (i.e. mycorrhiza-based biostimulant) by the ministry of agriculture and rural development:

The University Saad Dahlab of Blida 1 submitted the homologation file, which is based on scientific information generated by the project, to the ministry of agriculture and rural development on 30 March 2023, and the homologation certificate (Annex 1) was received on 18 December 2023, almost six months after project's completion date. Any private sector actor interested to invest in mycorrhiza-based biostimulants in Algeria can use this homologation (referred to as homologation of the product). Another homologation (referred to as homologation of the facility) should be obtained by any interested investor from the ministry of industry and mines and the ministry of environment and renewable energy before starting the production. It is the homologation of the product, and not the homologation of the facility, which is the challenging step and the potential barrier for commercialization of the innovation. Hence, the important and strategic contribution of the project. As a result of the product homologation, one private sector actor invested in 2024 in a facility with an annual production capacity of 400 tons of mycorrhiza-based biostimulants (as a starting point) and with a total initial investment of around 1.5 million CAD. According to a recent communication with the project leader, this investor is expecting to receive the homologation of the facility in September/October 2025 so he can start the commercial production and distribution of mycorrhiza-based biostimulants. This private investment made of the project a success story. In addition to this investment, the University of Blida obtained from the ministry of higher education and scientific research in March 2023 an authorization to establish a subsidiary (in French: une filiale qui est une société de droit privé au service de la gestion externe des activités de la recherche et de l'innovation de l'université). This subsidiary is expected to attract private co-investors.

- Isolation and production of new mycorrhizal strains endemic to Algerian soil:

Laboratory work was carried out to isolate five strains endemic to Algerian soil from different bioclimates (arid, semi-arid and sub-humid). Over $1,100 \mathrm{~kg}$ of mycorrhizae were produced for greenhouse experimentation and on-farm trials. It is worth noting that these strains will be used by the private investor referred to above for commercial production and distribution.

- Greenhouse experimentation:

The efficacy of mycorrhizal formulations was tested in controlled greenhouse environments. It is worth mentioning that greenhouse experimentation occurred during the COVID-19 lockdown. The university was closed during this period, and its research facilities were inaccessible. Greenhouse experimentation, which is a key phase in

--- Page 2 ---

# PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT 

project's implementation, was carried out by the two lead researchers of this phase in their own property to ensure the continuation of this important research activity.

- On-farm trials:

Trials carried out with 188 farmers in three bioclimates (arid, semi-arid and sub-humid) and on different vegetable crops demonstrated an increase in yields between $32 \%$ and $55 \%$ when mycorrhizae were used.

- Conceptualization of a business model to facilitate impact at scale:

A business model was designed, placing the private sector at its center. The project organized a strategic workshop at national level with key actors from the private sector to introduce the innovation, present its proven impact and advocate for its adoption. These actors were equipped at a later stage with a study commissioned by the project on the profitability of investing in mycorrhiza-based biostimulants. This study demonstrated an internal rate of return consistently above $20 \%$ in all scenarios considered. This was completed by the homologation of the innovation as a key step to facilitate its commercial production and distribution.

## B. Highlights:

B. 1 This project was selected with two other completed AFS/CRFS-funded projects from Morocco (Project 108637) and from Tunisia (Project 108366) to be the core material of an IDRC-led flagship knowledge sharing event (Towards Climate-Resilient Agriculture in North Africa) which took place in Morocco in May 2024 (summary report). The findings of Algeria project contributed to the two key evidence-based messages conveyed by IDRC in this event:

- Advancing climate-resilient agriculture in North Africa requires an increase in the investments by concerned stakeholders (research and donor communities, UN agencies, public and private sectors, and civil society) in the mechanisms and business models that would allow technical solutions to be adopted at large scale. IDRC called for a dialogue among concerned stakeholders to facilitate a process towards moving the gravity center of investments from the sphere of technical solutions to the sphere of mechanisms and business models.
- Advancing resilient agriculture requires the engagement of the private sector and the enhancement of private-public sector and South-South collaboration.
B. 2 The project demonstrated a significant increase in crop productivity (yield per unit land) ranging between $32 \%$ and $55 \%$ (depending on the crop) as result of the application of mycorrhizal fungi. This makes the potential contribution of the project to the food security in Algeria immense, particularly that the mycorrhizal fungi are isolated from Algerian soils (i.e., no dependence on imports) and their application can cover the three main agro-ecological zones of the country (arid, semi-arid and subhumid). When the project was approved in early 2019, it was considered as a strategic project for Algeria. During its implementation it becomes even more strategic than

--- Page 3 ---

originally thought, given the importance of local food systems which was enhanced under the pandemic of COVID-19 and given the global disturbance of the grain supply chains associated with the war in Ukraine. With the skyrocketing cost of chemical fertilizers in 2022 (partly due to the energy crisis), the availability of the relatively cheap and impactful alternative (or supplement) of bio-fertilization (represented by the innovation of the project) presented an opportunity for both investors from the private sector and farmers with the potential to make a significant difference at national level with respect to lowering the cost of agricultural production, to increasing the revenues of farmers and to enhancing the country's food security in general.
B. 3 The project is a collaboration between a Canada-based institution (Collège de Maisonneuve) and a national university (University of Blida). The research idea came from the Canadian institution and was put into practice by Algerian researchers based in an Algerian institution with the use of Algerian soils to isolate and multiply the innovation. This collaboration was made possible through a grant by IDRC, a Canadian Crown Corporation. The project leader at "Collège de Maisonneuve" is a Canadian Algerian researcher. This sheds light on the importance of the role that diaspora can play in the collaboration between Canada-based research institutions and Algeria. All these elements make of this project an interesting story that can be told by the Embassy of Canada in Algeria. This story was conveyed in a physical meeting which took place at the Embassy on 15 November 2022. Discussions focused on how to enhance the visibility of Canada in Algeria through this project.

B4. The responsible program officer visited Algeria in November 2022 to participate in a strategic workshop organized by the project and targeting key actors from the private sector with the aim to promote the innovation. Following the workshop, a meeting took place with the project's team to discuss the road map for project's implementation in the remaining critical four months before the work completion date. This road map focused on the need for homologating the innovation by concerned public authorities and for a feasibility study to encourage the engagement of the private sector in its production and/or commercialization. These two activities were not foreseen by the project. Their successful accomplishment in the remaining period was central in paving the road to a potential impact at scale. The resulting private investment which took place in 2024 made this project a success story. This road map was mainly informed by the intelligence/knowledge gained by the program officer from the discussions among different stakeholders who participated in the workshop. It is not possible to gain this intelligence from virtual meetings and from reading project's reports. This travel to Algeria presents an additional example illustrating the crucial role of field visits by program officers in adjusting the strategic directions of projects to achieve their expected results. This is also an additional example showcasing the need to make the plus bolder in IDRC's grant + business model.

# RESEARCH OUTPUTS 

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

- The homologation file based on scientific information generated by the project (Annex 2).

--- Page 4 ---

- A policy brief (Annex 3).
- A video produced by IDRC:

The project was selected by IDRC as one of the five CRFS star projects to support the Food Campaign 2024.

French : Semer l'avenir : les mycorhizes qui améliorent les sols en Algérie
English: Sowing the future with mycorrhiza to improve soils in Algeria

- Several videos were produced by the project as promotional materials:
- DZCADéveloppement d'agent mycorhiziens endémiques - YouTube
- بتعاون جزائري-كندي, مشروع تطوير الفطريات التجذرية المتوطنة Mycorhizes - YouTube
- Technique de mycorhization - YouTube
- شهادة فلّاحة حول استخدام سماد طبيعى "الميكوريز" على أشجار الزيتون - YouTube
- شهادة فلّاح حول السماد الطبيعى "الميكوريز "على البطاطا DZCA - YouTube
- شهادة فلّاح- نتائج استخدام السماد الطبيعى "الميكوريز" على الطماطم - YouTube
- شهادة فلّاح-استخدام السماد الطبيعى "الميكوريز" على الفلفل - YouTube
3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The project was expected to support two PhD theses. The two candidates started their research work, but they were not able to accomplish it for personal reasons (one case was health-related). Two scientific articles were also expected to be produced. In a recent communication with the project leader, he revealed the intention to produce one article.

# PROJECT OUTCOMES 

## 4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

This research project isolated and multiplied five new mycorrhizal strains endemic to Algerian soil. On-farm trials in the three main agro-ecological zones of the country and on different crops demonstrated an increase in yields between $32 \%$ and $55 \%$ when mycorrhizae were used. The project facilitated the investment of the private sector in mycorrhiza-based biostimulants by homologating the innovation and by advocating for its evidence-based profitability. This resulted in one private sector actor establishing in 2024 a facility with an annual production capacity of 400 tons of mycorrhiza-based biostimulants as a starting point. The impact of this relatively cheap and locally produced innovation on

--- Page 5 ---

# PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT 

enhancing the food security of Algeria will be substantial if/when other private sector actors will join this business. The project paved the road for this impact.

## 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The backbone of the project consists of three main phases: 1) isolation and production of new mycorrhizal strains endemic to Algerian soil, 2) greenhouse experimentation and onfarm trials, and 3) conceptualization of a business model to facilitate impact at scale. The technical proposal was not sufficiently clear about how to address the third phase and the struggle in the conception of the intended business model continues until the last year of the project's implementation. A strategic adjustment of the direction of the project took place in November 2022, four months before the work completion date. With the adjusted direction, the engagement of the private sector became central in the business model and the homologation of the innovation which was not an intended output became the master output which paved the road for a potential impact at scale.
6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic/core objectives? Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project was developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

The project was funded by Agriculture and Food Security Program (AFS) in 2015-2020 Strategic Plan. By paving the road to enhance food security in Algeria through identifying, testing and scaling an innovation, the project is consistent with AFS goal of supporting new knowledge and innovations that lead to scalable food security solutions for the poor. The project is a direct contribution to IDRC's strategic objective 1 "invest in knowledge and innovation for large scale positive change".

## 7. ObJectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2 .

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

## General Objective:

Accroître la sécurité alimentaire, améliorer la productivité et augmenter les revenus des petits agriculteurs algériens à travers la conceptualisation, le pilotage et la dissémination des modèles d'affaire permettant à une bio-innovation (la mycorhization) d'être produite et adoptée à grande échelle en Algérie.

--- Page 6 ---

| 4 Fully met | $\square \mathbf{X} 3$ | $\square 2$ | $\square 1$ Not met |
| :-- | :-- | :-- | :-- |
| Comment: |  |  |  |

# Specific Objective 1: 

Identifier différentes formulations mycorhiziennes endémiques pouvant offrir des solutions aux problèmes de fertilité des sols dans les bioclimats typiques d'Algérie.
$\square \mathbf{X} 4$ Fully met $\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

## Comment:

## Specific Objective 2:

Développer des modèles d'affaire permettant la production et l'adoption de mycorhizes endémiques à grande échelle en Algérie.
$\square \mathbf{X} 4$ Fully met $\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

## Comment:

## Specific Objective 3:

Identifier les conditions nécessaires pour que ces modèles d'affaire soient viables techniquement et économiquement pour les producteurs et les utilisateurs (agriculteurs) de mycorhizes.
$\square 4$ Fully met $\quad \square \mathbf{X} 3 \quad \square 2 \quad \square 1$ Not met

## Comment:

This specific objective was fully met in addressing the necessary conditions for private sector investment and in demonstrating empirically and rigorously the impact of mycorrhiza-based biostimulants on the productivity of a wide range of crops cultivated by 188 farmers in the three main agro-ecological zones of Algeria. However, other impacts related to farmers' revenues, to environmental parameters (associated mainly with a decrease of the use of chemical fertilizers and of irrigated water on crops treated with mycorrhiza-based biostimulants), and to women empowerment were limited to few illustrative case studies.

--- Page 7 ---

# Specific Objective 4: 

Établir une stratégie de promotion et de dissémination des modèles d'affaire au niveau national.
$\square 4$ Fully met $\quad \square \mathbf{X} 3 \quad \square 2 \quad \square 1$ Not met
Comment:
Specific Objectives 2 and 4 somehow merged in project's implementation. There was not a menu of business models to be designed, tested and promoted by a strategy as originally thought at the proposal development stage. There was basically one business model placing the private sector at its center with homologation of the innovation by the ministry of agriculture and rural development being a key pillar of this model. This pillar can be also considered as essential part of the scaling up strategy. The knowledge generated by the project on the significant positive impact of mycorrhiza-based biostimulants on crop productivity in the three main agro-ecological zones of Algeria as well as on the profitability of investment for the private sector (an internal rate of return consistently above $20 \%$ in all scenarios considered) informed the business model and made the case for its viability.

## FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

Nothing in particular.

## STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

COVID-19 pandemic was an unanticipated risk. As mentioned earlier, greenhouse experimentation occurred during the COVID-19 lockdown. The university was closed during this period, and its research facilities were inaccessible. Greenhouse experimentation, which is a key phase in project's implementation, was carried out by the two lead researchers of this phase in their own property (as a mitigation strategy to this risk) to ensure the continuation of this important research activity.
10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

--- Page 8 ---

Nothing in particular.

# Program Leader / Manager comments 

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.
This PCR makes clear the success of the project in identifying and testing a valuable innovation for agriculture and livelihoods for diverse crops across production zones of Algeria. It will be interesting to learn more about longer term outcomes, especially to the equitable uptake and adaptive use of the innovation across the country and region, equity and access by small-holder farmers and the implications for gender equality.

Greg Hallen
Team Leader, CRFS

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.
Pierre D. KADFET, CRFS Director - August 1, 2025
This PCR reports a successful project, with a high potential for impact at scale, supported by strong research to action scheme, including an academic partner, the relevant line ministries and a private sector actor. The adapted technology for Algeria has the potential for expansion to other climate hot spots in the Countries of the Maghreb and Sahel agroecosystems. The performance of on-farm trials that revealed yield increase ranging from 32 and $55 \%$ will most likely have significant impacts on food security, women economic empowerment and climate adaptation and resilience.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

