---
document_id: 108425 Researching the obesogenic urban food environment its drivers and potential policy levers in South Africa and Ghana
document_name: 108425 Researching the obesogenic urban food environment its drivers and potential policy levers in South Africa and Ghana.docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 6
chunk_count: 2
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Generated new knowledge and enhanced visibility:
This project resulted in 6 peer reviewed publications, 8 digital stories and 1 short documentary video. Collectively, these outputs have contributed to a stronger understanding of the factors contributing to obesogenic food environments in South Africa and Ghana. The project team also participated in several national and regional workshops and conferences, which helped establish their position as thought leaders in the field of food environment and health. For instance, the Ghanaian co-PI Dr Reggie Annan was appointed as one of the lead facilitators for Ghana's Food Systems Dialogue which was convened in the run up to the 2021 United Nations Food Systems Summit. The South African PI, Prof Rina Swart, was invited to serve in various advisory roles including projects led or funded by the Africa Center for Cities, UNICEF, and Stellenbosch University among others.

Deepened South-South research partnership
The project facilitated collaboration between researchers at the University of Western Cape and their counterparts at Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology in Kumasi, Ghana. This type of South-South collaboration is crucial in fostering a community of practice in a previously under-researched field in Sub-Saharan Africa. A scoping study by IDRC's Food Environment and Health program found that research capacity in the food environment and health field was robust in South Africa but limited in the rest of the region. As a result, the program aimed to encourage collaborations between South African researchers and their counterparts in other African countries. The leadership and support provided by the South African team in this project serves as an effective and exemplary model for future collaborations.

Strengthened local research capacity:
The project provided support for 1 post-doctoral researcher (a female), 3 PhD students (including two females), and 2 master's students (one female). The research team's innovative methodologies were shared beyond the project through various workshops, such as the one offered at the International Congress of Dietetics on September 4, 2021, which had 35 attendees. The workshop focused on the project's insights and specifically the usefulness of qualitative methods in nutrition research.

Informed policy dialogues:
The project received recognition from governance and policy sectors in both study countries through strategic engagement with relevant platforms. Notably in Ghana, the project team co-convened the National Nutrition Dialogue in partnership with the National Development Planning Commission and other key players. The event was attended by the Minister of Planning, the Dutch Ambassador to Ghana, the President of the Ghana Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, and featured a keynote address by the CEO of the John Agyekum Kufour Foundation. A communique was signed and distributed through media outlets, such as Modern Ghana.

In South Africa, the project team partnered with the Southern Africa Food Lab to establish a consortium of research and civil society organizations. The consortium organized a National Dialogue on Food Policy on October 31, 2019, in Tshwane, South Africa, bringing together 56 stakeholders from

--- Page 1 ---

government, civil society, academia, and the progressive food industry. The policy dialogue resulted in a broad consensus on the need for a more transparent and inclusive national food system, and a mandate for the consortium to continue advocating for this agenda.

Gender implications:
A gendered analysis showed that the gender of the person responsible for household food purchasing and preparation was linked to the types of food most frequently consumed. Households where men were responsible for purchasing food were found to consume more meat, fast food, salty snacks, and ready-to-eat meals, which have been linked to higher risks for non-communicable diseases. Meanwhile, households where women were responsible for food purchasing and preparation were found to consume more sugar and home-baked bread. These gender differences imply that health promotion and other behaviour change interventions must be tailored to each gender.

# Research Outputs 

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Kroll F, Swart EC, Annan RA, Thow AM, Neves D, Apprey C, Aduku LNE, Agyapong NAF, Moubarac J-C, Toit Ad, Aidoo R, Sanders D. Mapping Obesogenic Food Environments in South Africa and Ghana: Correlations and Contradictions. Sustainability. 2019; 11(14):3924
https://doi.org/10.3390/su11143924
Agyapong NAF. Annan RA, Apprey C, Linda N. E. Aduku LNE, Swart EC. The association between dietary consumption, anthropometric measures and body composition of rural and urban Ghanaian adults: a comparative crosssectional study. BMC Nutrition (2020) 6:21
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40795-020-00339-6
Agyapong NAF, Annan RA, Apprey C, Aduku LNE. Body Weight, Obesity Perception, and Actions to Achieve Desired Weight among Rural and Urban Ghanaian Adults". Journal of Obesity, 2020, ID 7103251. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/7103251

Lorinda OT, Aidoo R, Yankyera KO, Apprey C, Annan RA and Yamoah FA. Imported Chicken Value Chain in an Obesogenic Ghanaian Food Environment: Knowledge, Practices and Perceptions of Actors. J Food Sci Nutr (2020), 6:071. DOI: 10.24966/FSN-1076/100071

Moyo, BH, and Thow, A. 2020. Fulfilling the Right to Food for South Africa: Justice, Security, Sovereignty and the Politics of Malnutrition, World Nutrition, (2020), 11(3):112-152 https://doi.org/10.26596/wn.2020113112-152

Moyo, Hh. Photo-elicitation and the voiceless: Narrating the "lived experiences" perspective of informal street food vendors in Khayelitsha, Cape Town. World Nutrition. (2021), 12:3
https://doi.org/10.26596/wn.202112391-112

--- Page 2 ---

ROFE-SAFL Dialogue on Obesogenic Food Environments:
https://www.southernafricafoodlab.org/rofe-safl-dialogue/
If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Project outputs were completed and of good quality.
Project Outcomes
How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

This project has made a significant impact on the discourse around food systems and the vulnerability of the poor to unhealthy food consumption patterns both in Ghana and South Africa. The research findings confirmed the impact of modernization and urbanization on the shift towards processed foods and away from fresh produce and gained a better understanding of the underlying factors such as availability, cost, and infrastructure. Key findings from the analysis of food value chains included: limited access to healthy foods for the poor, a focus on profit over health in the value chain, challenges in the distribution of fresh produce, insufficient incentives for healthy food options from local government regulations, insufficient attention to real consumer needs in health promotion efforts, and an unequal playing field due to aggressive marketing of unhealthy foods.

This project engaged with and impacted over 200 stakeholders and individuals through learning journeys and multi-stakeholder meetings to address the challenges facing a sustainable food environment. Thus, the project has contributed to raising the profile and credibility of the research teams in the food policy space. For instance, the project team played a central role in the establishment of Ghana's first National Nutrition Forum, with a commitment by policymakers, civil society actors and other stakeholders to hold this forum annually. Additionally, members of the project team in South Africa were invited to contribute to revising the National Department of Health's Strategy on the Prevention of Obesity.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

This project did not result in any unintended outcomes.
How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.

--- Page 3 ---

Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change: This project made a major contribution to the understanding of the drivers of obesogenic food environment in Ghana and South Africa, producing a novel body of knowledge and engaging a wide range of stakeholders.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow: The project provided support for 1 post-doc, 3 PhD students and 2 Masters students, and also helped increase the project team's recognition as experts in the field of food environment and health.

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 1:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 2:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 3:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 4:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 5:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Financial performance
Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre

--- Page 4 ---

processes?
Strategic Considerations
Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

Program Leader comments
Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

Director comments
The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Action Items / Next Steps
Distribution list
Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director CRFS: Santiago Alba-Corral
Ag. Director GH: Montasser Kamal
Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure
Regional Director, WARO: Julie Crowley
CRFS Team
Global Health Team
Communications: Angela Baiya, Lancelot Ehode
VP PPB: Dominique Charron
VP SRP: Julie Shouldice
Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin
Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon

--- Page 5 ---

GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie
Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

