---
document_id: PCR 109024 Towards eliminating anemia in the high Andes linking social protection with agriculture and nutrition interventions
document_name: PCR 109024 Towards eliminating anemia in the high Andes linking social protection with agriculture and nutrition interventions.docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 6
chunk_count: 4
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

The project published one of the first peer reviewed papers on the impact of COVID on food security of agricultural communities in South America

Advanced the testing on farmer fields of new biofortified potatoes with high levels of Zinc and Iron.
Significantly advaced the dissemination of nutritional information to rural communities. This included the creation of a video and a song to promote the use of biofortified potatoes in enhanced diets. Campaing materials have been subsequently used by government agencies in other rural areas of Peru.

Linked various government agencies responsible for social protection, nutrition and agriculture, especially the programs to reduce the incidence of anemia in rural areas. An important milestone as these agencies do not frequently work together.

The team was able to rapidly adapt to the restrictions in mobility and in person gathering imposed by Covid. Despite the field sites being in remote, isolated communities, by strenghtening and empowering a local NGO (Asociacion Pataz) they were able to implement most project field activities and data collection, which was remarkable given the circumstances.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Publications:
Final Technical Report
Journal Article: Health crisis and quarantine measures in Peru: Effects on livelihoods of coffee and potato farmers Health crisis and quarantine measures in Peru: Effects on livelihoods of coffee and potato farmers (cgiar.org) // https://oidrc.sharepoint.com/:b://r/sites/int-projects/project/109024\ Towa rds\%20eliminating\%20anemia\%20in\%20the\%20high\%20Andes\%20linking\%20social\%20protection\%2 0with\%20agriculture\%20and\%20nutrition\%20interventions/1-s2.0-S0308521X20308945-main.pdf?csf= 1\&web;=1\&e;=tmtVK6

Journal Article: Ordinola,M.andDevaux,A.(2021). Desafíos y oportunidades para el sector papa en la zona andina en el contexto de laCOVID-19.Revista Latinoamericana De La Papa,25(1), 101-123. https ://oidrc.sharepoint.com/sites/int-projects/_layouts/15/DocldRedir.aspx?ID=QSWE2NNTMQPJ-9071435 84-662387

--- Page 1 ---

Journal Article: DevauxA., Hareau G., Ordinola M., Andrade-Piedra J., and Thiele G.2021. Las papas nativas: de ser un cultivo olvidado al boom culinario e innovación de mercado.Revista Latinoamericana De La Papa,25(2), 3-14.
https://oidrc.sharepoint.com/sites/int-projects/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=QSWE2NNTMQPJ-907 $143584-662386$

Poster: COVID-19 Guidelines for technicians and farmers involved in potato farming. Medidas COVID-19 para agricultores y tecnicos que realizan labores en el cultivo de papa. (cgiar.org)

Linking social protection with agriculture and nutrition interventions. Biofortified potato to alleviate anemia in the high Andes of Peru. Project profile. https://hdl.handle.net/10568/101586

Audio Visual materials:
Song: Papas Puño de Hierro (Iron Fist Potatoes)
https://cgiar.sharepoint.com/:u:/s/CIP/ddgr/sns/EWxk42jF5bROoAyDKaSX4pcBxtdtyHoQFLNxzoqH3Lf aqw?e=r2zpIO

Video: Link to the Youtube video to the song: Papas Puño de Hierro (Iron Fist Potatoes). https://cgiar.s harepoint.com/:v:/s/CIP/ddgr/sns/EaUhhV9sfH5GuZkntgaWw_cBEFYWtEr03HAsaJhqp2IPtw?e=G0s2 5J

Conferences:
Ordinola M., Fonseca C., Maldonado L., Suárez V., Pradel W., Devaux A., and Hareau G. 2021.Sistemas alimentarios y productivos en la zona andina: agricultura, nutrición y generación de ingresos. Seminario SEPIA XIX -Puerto Maldonado 2021. Accepted for publication in SEPIA Book (2022)

Ordinola,M.2021.Innovación y Desarrollo de Mercados de Papas Nativas en el Perú. Actas del XIX Congreso Latino-Iberoamericano de Gestión Tecnológica y de la Innovación -ALTEC.Editor: Asociación Latino-Iberoamericana de Gestión Tecnológica y de la Innovación. ISSN: 2789-9764. p. 166-185. https://www.altecasociacion.org/memorias-altec-2021.

Future publications planned:
CIP institutional publication with project approach, achievements and lessons learned (end of 2022).
Scientific article on the approach used to enhance the link between agricultural production and food systems to improve food security for the most vulnerable rural families. (expected to be ready for submission at the end of 2022).

SEPIA Book: Sistemas alimentarios y productivos en la zona andina: agricultura, nutrición y generación de ingresos (2022).

Blogs and policy brief on "Findings and lessons learnt from gender responsive scaling of agricultural innovations and social protection programs" (Q3 2022).

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

--- Page 2 ---

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

NA
Project Outcomes
4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The thematic area of the project on 'biofortification" to use improved crops with higher contents of nutrients and minerals ( $\mathrm{Fe}, \mathrm{Zn}$ ) as a strategy to reduce the incidence of anaemia, is an under-researched thematic field. This project made concrete contributions to show that this is a feasible strategy and opened gates to scale the approach through the Peruvian national nutrition programs in regions with high incidence of anaemia.

The project published one of the first peer reviewed papers on the impact of COVID on food security of agricultural communities in South America. This helped to raise awareness at government levels to the need to craft especific policies and modify existing social protection programs to mitigate the impact of COVID on farming communities.

The project team, in collaboration with the CIP breeding program, contributed to the evaluation of eight biofortified potato clones for the second consecutive year, with the purpose of releasing one or two varieties for the northern highlands of Peru. This proved crucial to keep the timelines for releasing new enriched potato varieties, which is expected to happen towards the second part of 2022. If this would have been interrupted, it would take another 3 years to release the new varieties.

The methodology of formative research was adapted by the Institute of Nutritional Research (IIN) and implemented with Asociacion Pataz in the project intervention areas.

Adaptation and application of the FAO KAP-Anemia survey for the case of potato farmers in the high Andes of Peru. The same tools will subsequently be used in other regions of the country.

Adaptation of the RTB Scaling Readiness methodology. All these were new contributions to develop and adapt materials for further use in other intervention areas.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

COVID was completely unexpected at the approval phase and at the start of the project and could have had seriously derailed its implementation. The team was however very quick and effective in reacting and giving more flexibility, power and resources to Asociacion Pataz, the local NGO that implemented most of the field testing of biofortified potatoes and interacted with farmer communities. This proved very effective and allowed the completion of most of the planned workplan. Some of the nutritional campaigns had to be scaled down given the limitations imposed by authorities on the number of people that could attend meetings and workshops. Some of the interviews and focus groups had to be conducted using cellphones instead of being in person as was the original plan.

--- Page 3 ---

The engagement of government agencies responsible for the coordination of nutrition and agriculture programs in Peru was challenging. This was in part due to the impact of Covid that prevented having face to face meetings and presentations and to a greater extent, by the political struggle that faced Peru over the past two years and resulted in repeated changes in government with an extremely high turnover of ministries. This made it difficult to give continuity to meaningful engagement. Despite this, the team was able to influence the programs of the Institute of Nutritional Research who will continue using the biofortified varieties as part of the nutritional campaigns. More recently, the Ministry of Agriculture adopted the materials generated by the project to launch nutritional campaigns in other regions of Peru.

How did this project contribute one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the Strategic Plan. Provide specific numbers where possible.
Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change
Build the leaders for today and tomorrow
Be the partner of choice for greater impact
The project contributed mainly to the strategic objective of generating knowledge and innovation. The evaluation of the nutritional effect of the biofortified varieties showed positive impacts, and although the data is still being analyzed, results indicate that absorption of Iron and Zinc from the potatoes is very high and can help correct some of the most serious deficiencies particularly on children and women. This finding, once confirmed, will serve as a key message to government agencies responsible for the anemia reduction programs in Peru.

The project also helped to consolidate a leadership position from CIP's researchers involved in Biofortification as tools to reduce anemia. The Asociacion Pataz has greatly enhanced its capability and leadership by adding nutritional components in their own programs. This may prove significant over time as this is an institution with influence in the local governments and communities of the High Andes.

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Specific Objective 4: Generate policy recommendations for the implementation of the scaling framework in Peru

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Financial performance
Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

This project was developed within the annual AFS (now CRFS) window of funding for the CGIAR Centres. A few CG centres were invited to submit proposals and after a competitive process, this was one of the two grants approved in fiscal year 2018-2019. The model of inviting 3 or 4 CG centres to

--- Page 4 ---

submit CNs for this window, is appropriate to maintain the engagement with the CG system and enable CRFS to fill specific gaps in our research portfolio, or to try innovative ideas, taking advantage of the high capacity, reliability and scientific expertise of the CGIAR. I recommend this scheme to continue. To minimize transaction costs, it may be more effective to grant only one project of 1M (available budget) per year. This has been tried in last year allocations and is working well. It is advisable to keep the same model for programming with the CGAIR over at least five years and then evaluate the model and decide on its continuation. Despite these investments being small for the CGIAR, all centres agree that they highly value the intellectual contribution from IDRC. This to me is a worth keeping window of funding.

# Strategic Considerations 

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Yes, to the most part. However, by far the main impact on the life of the project was the completely unanticipated Covid pandemic. This affected the timelines for field activities, interfered with in person data collection and forced the team to readjust the relation with the local NGO partner, who took more responsibility for the implementation of the field work. This strategy worked well. One risk anticipated in the PAD related to changes in central and provincial governments and cascading effects on government agencies responsible for agriculture and nutrition tasks in Peru. This ended being far more frequent and disruptive than anticipated. The political environment in Peru deteriorated in 2020 and 2021. There were two changes of president and numerous changes of Ministers, a situation that has not yet been stabilized. It naturally interfered with the continuity in the relations with government agencies and required redoing all efforts quite a few times. The consequence was a less that intended uptake of policy recommendations. The team was however effective in keeping engagement with mid level officers in the Ministry of Agriculture and of Social Protection, and that is starting to pay off post project completion. The government has recently approved new programs that incorporate the approach developed by the project and use biofortification of potatoes and other crops as part of the nutritional campaigns to reduce the incidence of anemia in the high Andes.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were not any issues or challenges with the implementation of the research ethics in the project. CIP has an internal board of ethics that reviews and approves research project and the team included social researchers well familiar with ethical guidelines to interact with communities in the field sites. The Asociacion Pataz, the local NGO partner also has its own ethical review board and the team agreed early on about the strategies to ensure that high ethical standards were consistently enforced through the lifecycle of the project.

Program Leader / Manager comments
Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

--- Page 5 ---

# Director comments 

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and formally approve the report and its contents.

As the PO explains in this PCR, IDRC's annual contribution to CGIAR continues to be one excellent modality to ensure high-quality agricultural research. "Towards eliminating anemia in the high Andes: linking social protection with agriculture and nutrition interventions" was the last project developed on the previous approach of several concept notes and small budgets (500K). Since then, IDRC (via CRFS) has changed the process to engage with CGIAR in a more strategic programmatic approach. IDRC's partnership with CGIAR has moved from more traditional research to supporting institutional pillars of our shared vision (i.e. gender or climate change recently). The recommendation of increasing budgets to CGIAR (from CAD500K to CAD1M) was incorporated just after the design of this project.

The resilience demonstrated by the grantee to accommodate and respond to the COVID19 crisis is commendable. The team grabbed the opportunity given by the crisis and adapted the research cycle so they could publish about the impact of COVID in their sector. Despite the challenges of political instability and public health limitations, the team delivered.

This PCR summarizes an excellent project with good results that continue proving the robust research capacity of CGIAR.

I approve this PCR
Santiago Alba-Corral
Director Programs, Climate-Resilient Food Systems
Action Items / Next Steps
Distribution list
Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Area, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Area, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs and Grants Administration Officer.

Dominique Charron, Ida St-Martin, Santiago Alba, Luisa Solano, Federico Burone, CRFS team, Vikram Singh, Valthsala.

Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

