---
document_id: PCR project 108978 - CIFOR-Shea Parklands
document_name: PCR project 108978 - CIFOR-Shea Parklands.pdf
original_format: .pdf
page_count: 10
chunk_count: 23
---

--- Page 0 ---

| Project | 108978 - "Globalization in a nutshell - Opportunities and <br> risks for women shea producers in West African shea <br> parklands" |
| :-- | :-- |
| Responsible Officer | Michele Leone |
| Principal Investigator | Dr. Andrew Wardell <br> Principal Scientist <br> Centre for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) \& World <br> Agroforestry (ICRAF) <br> 15, Avenue du Quartier Haut, Vendemian 34230, France <br> a.wardell@cgiar.org \| Cell phone: +33 768 78 22 02 <br> Skype: Andrew Wardell <br> https://www.cifor.org/research-staff/1996/d-andrew-wardell |
| Recipient Institution | CGIAR Centre for Internationl Forestry Research (CIFOR) |
| Location: Country | Burkina Faso |
| Location: Region | West Africa |
| Total Funding | CAD 450,000 |
| Project Start | March 2019 |
| Project Completion | Novermber 2021 (with one 6-month extension) |
| Author | Michele Leone |
| Date of Report | First version received 12 October 2021 <br> Final revised version received 24 November 2021 <br> Report approved on January 152022 |
| Final Technical Report | FTR |

# Project Abstract 

Shea fruits, nuts and butter are non-timber forest products from the shea tree (Vitellaria Paradoxa), the most widely occurring species in parklands in West Africa. The region accounts for almost all exports of shea with Burkina Faso being one of the main exporters. The fruits and butter serve as important ingredients in the diets of rural communities while the commercialization of surpluses is an important source of income for women.
The growing global demand for shea nuts and shea butter, and pressures to intensify local agricultural production systems to meet the demand for food and fuelwood pose new threats to the sustainability of shea parklands and for women's livelihoods. In addition, economic and environmental services provided by shea parklands are of increased importance to local communities whose precarious rural livelihoods is increasingly threatened by climate change.

This short, 24 months research project - then extended to 30 months to manage the impact of insecurity and covid-19, and to take advantage of unforeseen policy uptake opportunities arisen in the second half of 2021 - addressed two main questions: (i) As shea market dynamics shift due to transnational regulatory frameworks and the large-scale bulking-up of shea nut purchases by middle-men to supply transnational corporations, what are the implications of these shifts on the livelihoods of rural women producers who occupy the value chain's upstream nodes, and the shea parklands upon which they depend?; (ii) In a context of climate change and increasing

--- Page 1 ---

pressure on shea trees and products, which strategies can enhance the sustainability and equitable management of shea parklands, while maintaining women's access to shea resources?

The key results generated by this project were: 1) A complete report on the status of shea parklands in Burkina Faso, of the women's groups managing them, of the current legislation gaps and opportunities; and 2) a guidance document - co-produced with the ministries of Environments and of Agriculture of Burkina Faso - that is now used by the national government to be the knowledge basis for be the improved governance and management of shea parklands and shea value chains to reduce the vulnerabilities of women to economic and climate shocks.

To achieve these results, in line with the project objectives, the project used a combination of approaches including participatory research, household methodologies, social learning process, field research, global commodity chain analysis, multi-level governance approach and development of improved policy, regulations, and practices.

Some of the approaches above were rescaled and readjusted during the project implementation phase, leading for example to less emphasis on field activities and more on policy dialogues and recommendations. The circumstances that led to these choices, as well as the impacts on the project objectives, are discussed in the rest of this document.

The project was led by CIFOR and implemented by researchers from CIFOR and Bioversity International in collaboration with Université Nazi Boni (Institut du développement rural - IDR) and the département de l'environnement et des forêts de l'Institut de l'environnement et de recherches agricoles du Burkina Faso).

# PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS 

## 1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

- On the evidence-based decision-making side, CIFOR co-hosted a National Shea Forum on 2425 June 2021 with the MEEVCC, attended by 180 representatives of all actor groups in the shea supply chain in Burkina Faso. The National Shea Forum closed with a 'Call to Action' - led by the project - which is ongoing and envisages greater support for the development of a national parkland restoration program, domestication and genetic development of the shea tree and the potential introduction of an export tax to support the regeneration of parklands. The call to action also positions shea and the national Multi-Stakeholder Initiative (Table Filière Karité) within the portfolio of the MEEVCC, which has the technical capacity to oversee its implementation.
- Because of positive lobbying done by the project before, at and after the Forum, for the first time in Burkina Faso Shea Parklands were placed under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture jointly with MEEVCC.
- The outcome of the National Shea Forum was an important policy shift to guide the future restoration and management of agroforestry parklands, which will support the overall objective of the 'Globalizations in a Nutshell' research project by improving the resilience of the parklands and women shea butter producers. This will help to promote the sustainable and equitable exploitation and management of shea in accordance with Burkina Faso's National Climate

--- Page 2 ---

Change Adaptation Plan and the future implementation of the Second National Shea Development Strategy 2021-2025.

- Finally, the project had wide internal resonance at CIFOR and influence on the CGIAR work approach. The iterative approach to capacity development adopted by the project was presented during the CIFOR Annual Meeting in October 2019 and results were presented again on a yearly basis at the GCIAR Forests Tress and Agroforestry (FTA) Program conference.

The PO judges that these are noticeable outcomes for a project of less than 500k CAD of overall budget.

# RESEARCH OUTPUTS 

## 2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Only one monitoring and engagement visit was possible for IDRC at the beginning of the project. However, online monitoring interactions were frequent, and the PO could record how the positive dynamic facilitated by the PI led to several key outputs and publications with lead authorship of local scientists, who also retained the control on the collected primary data. This was due to two factors: the inclusive way of working of the project PI and their gender specialist, as well as the active participation of the lead institution in Burkina Faso, the University on Nazi Boni, with whom CIFOR has a long history of collaborations.

Finally, all project outputs were produced in English and French languages, and syntheses were translated to Bobo and Mossi language. Although French is the only official language in Burkina Faso, Mossi is the most frequently spoken language in the country, including among key national stakeholder in Ouagadougou, while Bobo is the traditional language widely spoken in the region where the large part of the project's fieldwork took place.

The following section provides a list of the main outputs in terms of key publications, capacity building and policy influence. The total number of outputs was 27, including 4 MSc Theses.

## Key publications:

- Shea (Vitellaria paradoxa C.F. Gaertn.) - a peripheral empire commodity in FrenchcWest Africa, 1894-1960 International Forestry Review - Wardell, D.A., Elias, M., Zida, M., Tapsoba, A., Rousseau, K., Gautier, D., Lovett, P. and Bama, T.
- Rôle des Chantiers d'aménagement forestiers dans la gestion durable et la conservation du karité (Vitellaria paradoxa C.F. Gaertn) dans la région centre-ouest du Burkina Faso (accepted for publication in Bois et Forêts des Tropiques) - Manbessoa MEDA, Marlène ELIAS, Mipro HIEN, Saïdou SANTI, Aurokiatou TRAORE, D. Andrew WARDELL, et Mathurin ZIDA

--- Page 3 ---

- Rôle de la Table Filière Karité dans l'appui aux producteurs locaux au Burkina Faso (CIFOR key report) - Tapsoba, A., Zida, M., Wardell, D.A. and Elias, M. Faso (report currently being translated into English)
- Insécurité et COVID-19 au Burkina Faso: opportunités et vulnérabilités des femmes de la chaine de valeurs du karité (CIFOR key report)- Tapsoba, A., Wardell, D.A., Zida, M. and Elias, M.


# Key presentation: 

- Continuity and change in shea supply chain governance in Burkina Faso, 1890-2019, in: CGIAR / Agropolis International, 2021. Agroecological transformation for sustainable food systems: 107-108 (presented at the World Summit on Food Systems in New York, September 2021) - note that this presentation was not only very well received at the UN FS, but it was noted as an example of collaboration between IDRC the the Montpellier Systems of Research.


## Participation in key policy documents:

- Plan d'Action Participatif pour une gestion inclusive des parcs a karite dans la Commune de Sapouy
- Plan d'Action Participatif pour une gestion inclusive des parcs a karite dans la Commune de Bougnounou-Nébiélianayou
- Independent review of the 'Stratégie National de Développement Durable de la Filière Karité du Burkina Faso 2015-2019'


## 3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality. <br> Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Results were of good quality. However, the project suffered a few setbacks, and it was able to bounce back. The project made considerable progress during the first six-month reporting period. The National Inception Workshop held in Ouagadougou in May 2019 proved - where the PO was present and could discuss engagement personally with the Minister of Environment, Green Economy and Climate Change (MEEVCC) - was invaluable in terms of assisting the project team to identify key partners and research issues including the prioritization of three Masters students, a case study of the Table Filière Karité, an assessment of the impacts of insecurity and COVID-19 on shea supply chains in Burkina Faso, and a review of the Stratégie Nationale de Développement Durable de la Filière Karité du Burkina Faso, 2015-2019. Subsequently, the project suffered several setbacks due to the deteriorating security and political situation. This was compounded by the indirect impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the constraints faced the project team, in consultation with IDRC, completed a second revision of the project milestones and deliverables and attendant budget revisions, to reflect what could be realistically achieved before the end of the project. Given this perfect storm, a 6 month No Cost Extension (NCE) and budget revisions were agreed with IDRC on 12 June 2020. The constraints continued during the final NCE and restricted travel and field work and limited meetings largely to virtual encounters, except for the National Shea Forum. Despite these overriding challenges, several key milestones were reached during the NCE. The most significant in terms of capacity strengthening were the successful defense of all three theses submitted by the MSc students to the Université Nazi-Boni/Institut de Développement Rural

--- Page 4 ---

(UNB/IDR). A Wageningen University Research MSc student also successfully completed her thesis. All four successfully defended their theses.

# PROJECT OUTCOMES 

## 4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area? <br> Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The project, thanks to the activities conducted during the 6-month extension, produced new knowledge on the impact of shocks of food systems on women producers in Burkina Faso, and their cooperatives, and recommendations on how this vulnerability can be reduced in other situation of crisis (for example linked to political instability and to repercussions of the speculation in the process of commodities linked to the war in Ukraine).
The analysis of the information gathered found that insecurity has a more direct impact on women producers than the pandemic in regions of the country at high risk of insecurity. However, stakeholders at the shea processing and distribution stages are affected more by measures to control the spread of Covid-19 than by insecurity. The security crisis has hampered, if not eliminated, income-generating opportunities for women in shea nut collection and shea nut and shea butter production, pushing many women further into poverty. Covid-19 response measures have caused a slowdown in the processing and distribution of shea products, especially for export, due to the contraction of the global economy, which absorbs around 90\% of Burkina Faso's shea nuts. Despite the economic support measures adopted by the Burkinabe Government, the economic model of farmers' organizations working in the shea sector has been weakened, further constricting their ability to honour commitments made to their business partners. Many of these farmers' organizations could have a very low chance of survival if the global economy does not recover quickly from the effects of the pandemic. In this context, the challenge of maintaining the international reputation of Burkinabe shea products and stakeholders in the shea sector is even more acute. Beyond direct stakeholders in the shea sector itself, in the case of a next similar shock the entire national economy could be significantly affected, given that shea is the country's fourth largest export.
Considering these findings, the project made the following recommendations: For direct stakeholders in the sector:

- Develop and promote shea products for local consumption;
- Focus on growing local and regional markets over global markets;
- Advocate for the introduction of a voluntary fixed-rate contribution in the shea sector to provide financial support to vulnerable stakeholders;
- Foster collective action rather than individualistic initiatives.

For the Burkinabe Government:

- Effectively guarantee the security of goods and people and eradicate the scourge of insecurity in the country;
- Implement a compulsory fixed-rate contribution in the shea sector to strengthen the financial capacity of organizations involved in the sector over the long term;
- Support initiatives by national stakeholders to add value to shea products locally, for example, through the installation of a fractional distillation unit for processing shea butter, as part of a public-private partnership;
- Build capacity at quality control facilities for shea products to comply with international standards. For credit institutions

--- Page 5 ---

- Improve the conditions and costs of access to credit for women shea nut and shea butter producers.


# 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way? <br> Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact? 

Some of the results were of less statistical significance and robustness due to the scaling down of field work and survey, and they refer to a smaller number of women cooperative with a smaller geographic spread than originally planned. This was entirely due to restriction due to security and covid-19 related lockdowns (it is important to notice that for a certain period the two restrictions even overlapped). This weakened on the potential for scaling, as there may be cases where the actions proposed by the project may not apply, considering how context dependent scaling is in many cases. Less robust than expected results were obtained on:

- revenue increase for women organized in cooperatives under an improved legislation for the management of shea parklands.
- Short term implication and trade-offs in transferring of shea parklands management from the Ministry of Environment to the Ministry of Agriculture, as recommended by the project. The main impact has been on the timing of the legislative change. However, this is now happening, and it is hard to say whether the delays could have been avoided with the presentation of more robust evidence, considered that the same exogenous factors that delayed and scaled down research also delayed the work of research users and decision makers at the national and regional level.


## 6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

The project contributed to the first of the objectives of the 2015-2020 strategic plan, under which it was conceived developed and initially implemented: Objective 1 to invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change. The potential for large scale change became apparent especially during the six-month extension period, when the team was able to present the results at the Regional Shea Alliance meeting and they were invited by the Ministry on Environment to codraft a new Strategy for the valorization of shea parklands. The strategy also contained the proposal to consider shea as an agricultural crop, rather than a tree, and therefore pass under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Agriculture, ensuring better protection of the parklands and better employment conditions of women working in them.

## 7. ObJectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2 .

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: The general objective of the research project was to contribute to enhancing the resilience of shea parklands and rural shea users by promoting the sustainable, equitable exploitation and management of shea trees and their products in accordance with Burkina Faso's

--- Page 6 ---

National Climate Change Adaptation Plan, and the National Strategy for Sustainable Development of the Shea Sector.
$\square 4$ Fully met
$\boxtimes 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

On the reasons why a 3 and not a 4 was assigned, see section 5 of the Project Completion Report.

Specific Objective 1 To understand drivers of change in the shea parklands as well as genderbased differences in the valuation of shea trees to help identify strategies to enhance the equitable and sustainable management of shea.
$\boxtimes 4$ Fully met
$\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Specific Objective 2: Identify in the different strands of the shea value chain vulnerabilities and opportunities for rural women shea producers including those posed by climate change and to provide science-based evidence for government agencies, shea producer associations and TransNational Corporations to support policy and governance reforms.
$\boxtimes 4$ Fully met
$\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Specific Objective 3 Build capacities of government, non-governmental, private sector, research and civil society actors in Burkina Faso using both national and global multi-stakeholder platforms (Table Filière Karité and Global Shea Alliance respectively).
$\square 4$ Fully met
$\boxtimes 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

On the reasons why a 3 and not a 4 was assigned, se section 5 of the Project Completion Report.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 

## 8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

There were no relevant financial issues. There were however delays due to a combination of covid19 impacts and deteriorating security conditions in Burkina Faso, which eventually led to the last coup. Some field activities and surveys had to be canceled, students' work stalled for several months, and alternative sources of data needed to be found. Some students had to revisit the topic and scope of their work. Team members based abroad (France and Italy) could not participate in a few key stakeholders' engagement activities either because the activities were cancelled or because they could not travel to and in the country. Nevertheless, the project team was efficient in adjusting and reorganizing activities, and in proposing work that equally contributes to the objectives but could be carried out under the new situation. In particularly, the project because more active in

--- Page 7 ---

policy uptake at the national and regional level. All this required flexibility is a serious reorganization of the budget, as well as a no-cost extension of 6 months, which was granted and was of extreme importance especially in reaching objective 3. Without such flexibility today we would not have a new national strategy inclusive of women in the shea value chain (women gained a stronger presence in the new Table de Concertation sur la Filiere de Karite' au Burkina Faso); we would not have four completed MSc thesis, with potential negative impact $n$ the life and the career of four students, and we would not have had the chance to discuss the research results with the Global Shea Alliance, as their meeting took place during the extension period. It is to be noted that despite the extension, the field activities had to be scaled down ad so the project was unable to completely spend the budget.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS 

## 9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Mitigation strategies were effective, although they had to be adjusted because impacts of Covid could not be foreseen at the time of the preparation of the PAD (see considerations above).

Broadly speaking, the Project Approval Document had identified these categories of risk:

1) Low interest of national stakeholders: this risk was managed and minimized via the persistence of the team, who did not miss any opportunity to engage. The approach of the project PI was very pragmatic, explaining the issues to the Minister of Environment in plain words. The research was designed in a way to give actionable suggestions all the way during the project. In the end, not only the interest of the Ministry of environment remained high, but stakeholders spontaneously brough in others from the Ministry of Agriculture. The project was able to participate in the concertation towards the preparation of the new national strategy for the management of the Shea parklands and their value chain.
2) This project was a complement to an existing CGIAR/CIFOR program (The Forests, Trees and Agroforestry Program - https://www.foreststreesagroforestry.org/ - FTA). Difficulties encountered in this existing program could have negatively affected the achievement of project's results. However, this did not materialize and in fact the team members regularly participated in the FTA activities where the project was quite prominent if visibility. FTA also suggested to the PI to submit a second proposal to IDRC, which was done, but it is currently on standby as CRFS resources for the current FY are fully allocated.
3) Short duration: the project was intended to last only two years. In general, this time is short for a work that includes original research, primary data collection, it involves students, and needs time to develop a meaningful engagement process with stakeholders. Without a 6month extension it would not have achieved the results envisioned, even without covid-19 or security instability. The 6-month extension allowed an overhaul of the activities, but the ambitions had to be scaled down. Un the future, as a PO I would not recommend that a project of this scope for less than 3 years. Since the previous risks were very well managed, they ended up boosting the project visibility within FTA and in Burkina Faso. For this reason, the short duration was still sufficient to largely reach the objectives.

--- Page 8 ---

Further work on this topic in Burkina Faso would be extremely important, not to lose the momentum of what this project has achieved so far. However, the rules of engagement in a very volatile political environment would need to be reconsidered.

# 10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed. 

CIFOR and their partners in Burkina Faso respected ethical requirements and procedures mandated by all institutions involved. Responding positively to ethical concerns regarding the participation of women - which was the main ethical risk identified in the PAD - The project fully embraced a do no-harm approach to field research. Opt-in and opt-out standard procedures were agreed in participatory way and followed consistently.

The project had to reschedule and scale down the work of MSc students, to respect lockdowns due to covid-19 and the security measures linked to the instability outside the cities of Ouagadougou and Bobo Dioulasso. This had an impact on the students, but the team operated with the highest ethical standards in dealing with the situation, and the project extension allowed students to earn their degrees with a manageable delay.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

As presented by the PO in this PCR, the project demonstrates, once more, the importance of flexibility and resilience in overcoming challenges. Despite facing security issues, political instability, and the COVID-19 pandemic, the project team demonstrated their ability to adapt by revising milestones, deliverables, and budgets to achieve project goals within the circumstances. I want to highlight how stakeholder engagement was crucial in shaping the project's direction and priorities. The National Inception Workshop played a vital role in identifying key partners and research areas, while personal engagement with the Minister of Environment fostered collaboration and alignment with national strategies.

The influence of this project and CIFOR's work on the CGIAR work approach is crucial to IDRC's role in supporting the new One-CGIAR. Particularly, knowledge sharing holds significant importance and is a central topic of discussion within the CGIAR System Council. The project contributed by presenting CIFOR's capacity development approach at conferences and meetings, effectively engaging a wider audience and creating an opportunity for potential replication in other contexts. Something to explore in the future Sub-Saharan African big bet for CRFS and our annual commitment to the CGIAR.

I approve this PCR.
Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS

--- Page 9 ---

# Action Items / Next Steps 

CIFOR proposed a second phase of the project to IDRC. The discussion reached a promising point but was put on standby due to lack of available funds and the fact that IDRC's yearly support to the CGIAR Centres via research grants had already been decided for the past and current fiscal years. CRFS is now working on a new programming plan and priority for West Africa, and the PO proposes to take this line of work into consideration.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

