---
document_id: PCR108984 The Cost of Eating Healthy in Kenya Comparative Analysis of Healthy versus Unhealthy Foods
document_name: PCR108984 The Cost of Eating Healthy in Kenya Comparative Analysis of Healthy versus Unhealthy Foods.docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 5
chunk_count: 3
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Generated new knowledge and enhanced visibility:
As far as we know, this project is the first of its kind to quantitatively assess the cost of eating healthy at a national level in Kenya. Four manuscripts are in the pipeline and are aiming to be published in open access journals. In addition, there is one policy brief, one video animation, and one blog post that are publicly available. The findings of this project were also featured in an article published by a major media outlet in Kenya. These outputs will serve to bolster the APHRC's standing as one of the foremost research institutions in Africa that focuses on the nexus between the food environment and health.

Informed policy dialogues:
During the dissemination events, policymakers and other stakeholders provided valuable feedback to the project team. In summary, the stakeholders appreciated the study results and confirmed that the evidence generated would influence their programs and activities. They also expressed their intention to use these findings to promote healthy food in various sectors, including advocating for more funding to be allocated to the agriculture sector. However, they also called for future studies that focus on sub-national level data, such as county-level data, since health is a devolved government function in Kenya. The stakeholders suggested that such sub-national data would produce evidence that is more likely to lead to action at the grassroots level.

## Gender implications:

A gendered analysis showed that compared to households led by men, a greater proportion of those led by women were able to adhere to the World Health Organization's recommended fruit and vegetable intake. However, women-led households that met the recommended intake of fruits and vegetables spent almost USD 100 more (per person annually) than male-led households that also met the same recommendations. The existence of these gender differences suggests that policy and program interventions aimed at improving the affordability of healthy diets should consider the potential gender implications.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Project full report
Wambiya, E., Osindo, J., Kisia, L., Ilboudo, P., and Mohamed, SF. 2021. The Cost of Eating Healthy in Kenya Study Report. African Population and Health Research Center (APHRC); Nairobi, Kenya. Available here: https://idl-bnc-idrc.dspacedirect.org/bitstream/handle/10625/60686/97703a30-e182-441

--- Page 1 ---

a-b43e-9ad2f1d856b8.pdf
Manuscript (pre-print)
Ilboudo PG, Kipruto S, Wambiya E, Kisia L, Osindo J, Kisiangani I, Donfouet H, Mohamed, S. Food Consumption in Kenya: Demand System Elasticities and Implications Towards Healthy Eating. Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn. 4109254

Policy brief
The cost of eating healthy in Kenya. Available here:
https://aphrc.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/Policy-Brief-COEH.pdf
Animation
What is the cost of eating health in Kenya? Available here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ssEfsN-n6jc
Blogpost
The cost of eating healthy in Kenya: Findings from a national survey. Available here:
https://aphrc.org/blogarticle/the-cost-of-eating-healthy-in-kenya-findings-from-a-national-survey/
Media Article
Food for thought: How healthy diet is out of reach. Published in People Daily. Available here:
https://www.pd.co.ke/lifestyle/food-for-thought-how-healthy-diet-is-out-of-reach-159064/
If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Project Outcomes
How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Eating healthy is associated with higher socioeconomic status
One of the main result indicators in this study is the Healthy Diet Index (HDI). The HDI is an indicator of how closely dietary patterns adhere to World Health Organization recommendations on healthy diets. A higher HDI score indicates better adherence to these recommendations. The study found that households of higher socioeconomic status have relatively higher HDI scores than poorer households. For example, the mean HDI score was 0.46 for the wealthiest households in Kenya versus -0.02 for the poorest households, showing a positive correlation between wealth and healthier dietary patterns. In fact, regardless of whether the household was headed by a man or woman or located in an urban or rural area, the study found that wealthier households tended to consume a healthier diet than poorer households.

A healthy diet comes at a higher price

--- Page 2 ---

The study showed that the majority (84\%) of the households assessed were only able to meet four or fewer (out of nine) of the World Health Organization's healthy diet recommendations. However, the households that were able to score relatively high (meeting 6 or more of the dietary recommendations) had an average spending of USD 576 per person per year, while those who were not able to meet any of the recommendations had an average spending of around USD 481 per person per year. In addition, households that complied with the recommended intake of fruits and vegetables spent a significantly higher amount (USD 823) per person annually, compared to those who did not comply with the recommendations (USD 413).

Women-led households consumed healthier diets
There were no significant differences between women-led and men-led households in terms of HDI score. Nonetheless, a significant finding was that a higher percentage of women-led households (50\%) were able to meet the recommended fruit and vegetable intake in comparison to households led by men (43\%). It is worth noting that women-led households that were able to fulfill the recommended intake of fruits and vegetables spent an average of nearly USD 100 more (per person annually) than male-led households that met the same recommendations.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.
Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change: To the best of our knowledge, this project is the first of its kind in Kenya that quantifies the cost of eating healthy. This novel evidence is now available to policymakers that may be considering developing and implementing fiscal policies for promoting healthy diet such as reduced taxes or subsidies for healthier foods such as fruits and vegetables.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow: This relatively modest investment was led by a mid-career woman-researcher, Dr Shukri Mohamed, and supported several young Kenyan researchers including a female Master's student, Lyagamula Kisia.

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

--- Page 3 ---

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 1:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 2:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 3:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 4:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 5:
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Financial performance
Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

There were no financial concerns related to the project, which was granted a 9-month no cost extension to compensate for project implementation delays caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.

Strategic Considerations
Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

Program Leader comments

--- Page 4 ---

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

Director comments
The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Action Items / Next Steps
Distribution list
Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director CRFS: Santiago Alba-Corral
Ag. Director GH: Montasser Kamal
Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure
CRFS Team
Global Health Team
Communications: Angela Baiya
VP PPB: Dominique Charron
VP SRP: Julie Shouldice
Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin
Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon
GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie
Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

