---
document_id: PCR_108657 - The Potential Effects of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages Tax on Obesity Prevalence in Tanzania
document_name: PCR_108657 - The Potential Effects of Sugar-Sweetened Beverages Tax on Obesity Prevalence in Tanzania.docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 5
chunk_count: 5
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

New knowledge on NCDs in Tanzania
The project produced novel evidence about the economic cost of NCDs in Tanzania and developed a mathematical model to estimate the impact that a $20 \%$ tax on sugar sweetened beverages (SSBs) will have on obesity and government revenue. The project found that the economic burden that NCDs place on the public health system in Tanzania almost doubled between 2015 and 2019. It also found that a $20 \%$ tax will reduce obesity levels by about $7 \%$ and almost double the revenue that the Government currently raises from excise taxes on SSBs.

Policy influence
The project team has made initial policy impact through an invited brief that was distributed to all government ministers. This brief is known as the Swahili Policy Brief and contributions to its content are by special invitation only. The project team were privileged to have been selected to present their work in the Swahili Policy Brief following a dissemination workshop that they organized. This invitation underlies the strong impression that the project findings made on the participants at the dissemination workshop which included representatives of the Ministry of Health, Tanzania Commission for Science and Technology, among others.

## Gender implications

This project found that SSB taxation is not likely to be gender neutral. Even though Tanzanian women have higher levels of obesity than men, a 20\% SSB tax will led to more than two times a reduction in obesity among men as compared to women. Policymakers and stakeholders will need to keep this in mind as they consider fiscal policy reforms and other complimentary interventions for NCD risk prevention in Tanzania.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

No peer reviewed publication has emerged yet from this project. Manuscripts have been drafted and are at various stages of review. It is anticipated that at least 2 papers will be published in open access journals beyond the duration of the project.

The project did however get media coverage across local newspapers in Tanzania including the Guardian, the Citizen, Nipashe and the Daily News. Media clippings are filed in the Project Document Set on Sharepoint.

--- Page 1 ---

An online news article in the Guardian entitled "Warning bells over rising cases of obesity" is also available here: https://www.ippmedia.com/en/features/warning-bells-over-rising-cases-obesity

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Not applicable.
Project Outcomes
How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The main goal of this project was to estimate the potential impact of tax on sugar sweetened beverages (SSB) on the prevalence of obesity. A secondary goal was to estimate how much additional revenue the Government of Tanzania could generate from this tax. Fiscal policies such as taxation have been recommended by the World Health Organization as cost-effective strategies for addressing NCDs. The key findings are as follows:

The economic burden and cost of NCDs is on the rise
The project found that the average annual economic cost of having an NCD amounts to US\$ 1,212 per person in 2019 which was more than the country's GDP per capita (US\$1,086 in 2019). This includes direct medical costs, direct non-medical costs such as travel and accommodation costs, and indirect costs such as income losses of individual patients. This amounts to a national aggregate cost of all NCD patients of US $\$ 349$ million in 2019. Further, NCDs cost the public health care system US\$281 million in 2019 compared to US $\$ 143$ million in 2015.

Taxation will reduce obesity levels
Using a mathematical model, the project found that levying a 20\% SSB tax in Tanzania will reduce obesity by $6.6 \%$ overall, and by $12.9 \%$ and $5.2 \%$ in adult males and adult females respectively. The SSB tax will have the strongest impact on adults in the age groups 15 to 34 and 55 to 64 years.

The model assumes that the beverage industry will pass 100\% of this tax increase to consumers. Therefore, a 20\% tax on SSBs will amount to a specific tax of TZS 294 (US\$0.13) per litre of soft drinks, TZS 326 (US\$0.14) per litre for energy drinks and TZS 307 (US\$0.13) per litre for sugar sweetened juices. Currently the specific tax on these products are TZS 61 (US\$0.026), TZS 58 (US\$0.025), TZS 9 (US\$0.004), and TZS 232 (US\$0.10), per litre for soft drinks, energy drinks, locally produced sugar sweetened juices and imported sugar sweetened juices respectively.

Government can expect significant revenue from taxation
Tanzania already has an excise tax on SSBs. The total amount of revenue it collects from this tax is TZS 416 billion (US\$ 178 million). By levying a 20\% SSB tax, total tax revenue will rise by 109\% to TZS 868 billion (US $\$ 372$ million). The project also estimated the administrative cost of implementing the tax. They found that it would only cost the Government of Tanzania around TZS 69,120,669 (US\$29,659) to implement a 20\% SSB tax - with about half of this being a one-off cost of passing tax reform legislation

--- Page 2 ---

in parliament.
How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

There were no unintended outcomes of the project.
How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.
Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change:
This project is the first of its kind in Eastern Africa that provides evidence of the potential impact that a tax on SSBs will have on obesity. The World Health Organization recommends fiscal policy interventions such as taxation as one of several tools aimed at addressing the rising global burden of NCDs. The evidence generated from this study is well positioned to influence policymakers in Tanzania to implement policy reforms that will be beneficial to the health of Tanzania and generate additional revenue that could be invested in NCD prevention activities.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow:
The project provided an opportunity for a woman researcher Prof Fortunate Makene and her co-investigators to position themselves as leading voices on the issue of fiscal policy for NCD prevention in Sub Saharan Africa.

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To estimate the potential impact of SSBs tax on obesity prevalence using mathematical simulation model, to provide evidence for policymaking and evidence-based actionable recommendations for implementation in Tanzania.

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 1: To determine the burden of non-communicable diseases (obesity and its associated diseases such as; diabetes, and cardiovascular disease, specifically hypertension and stroke) and the cost of inaction if nothing is done to address obesity

4 Fully met 321 Not met

--- Page 3 ---

# Comment: 

Specific Objective 2: To simulate the effect of increase in SSBs tax on obesity prevalence
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 3: To estimate government revenue that may be generated from an SSB tax as well as the administrative cost of implementing this tax

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Financial performance
Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

There were no challenges with regards to the financial performance of the project or IDRC's administration of it. Project received a six month no cost extension.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

There were no unanticipated risks other than the Covid-19 pandemic which affected the final stages of project. A no cost extension was sufficient to make up for the minor disruption caused by the pandemic.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

Ethical approvals were obtained as required and intended.
Director comments
The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Action Items / Next Steps
Not applicable.
Distribution list
Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the

--- Page 4 ---

Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director CRFS: Santiago Alba Corral
Director GH: John Dusabe-Richards
Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure
Global Health Team
CRFS Team
Communications: Angela Baiya
VP PPB: Dominique Charron
VP SRP: Julie Shouldice
Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin
Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon
GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie
Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

