---
document_id: PCR 108626 ECF project
document_name: PCR 108626 ECF project.docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 9
chunk_count: 5
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

LVIF funded this project because of its potential to reduce the cost of producing the ECF vaccine through two ways - i) reduce the time it takes to produce a vaccine batch of ECF vaccine and also ii) reduce the use of rabbits and cattle for both production and dose setting. Towards reducing the number of animals, the artificial tick feeding system (continuous flow in vitro system) developed by the USDA is an innovation that can be used instead of rabbits. In this project, it was optimised as a system that mimics the ears of rabbits or cattle when ticks are feeding on blood in nature. That way, these animals can be spared in experiments or vaccine production that needs to feed ticks such as ECF vaccine production. With an appropriate parasite quantification system, this system can now be used in East Coast fever vaccine production resulting in reduction of animals used. It is innovative in that it replaces rabbits for feeding ticks to propagate Theileria parasites used in vaccine production.

The transfer of the technology from the USDA in Washington State University facility to two labs in Morocco and Malawi was successfully carried out. It included training as well as building of leaders in the field of ECF biotechnology. In Morocco, a PhD student used the data for her studies. The two organisations now have the capacity and know-how to manage and use the technology.

Collaboration with the International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria was established. This was part of troubleshooting attempts to attenuate the ECF parasite by use of radiation energy (irradiation). Attenuation (making the parasite less virulent to allow injection into cattle without causing severe disease) was one of the project's objectives to exclude use of antibiotics during ECF immunisations. This is a useful collaboration with a global agency that has expertise in irradiation and are well positioned to support the project's work in the future.

The cattle handling facilities at African Union Centre for Ticks and Tick-Borne Diseases (CTTBD) were renovated following an inspection by the USDA. The inspection report showed that they did not meet USDA standards for animal welfare. This transformation will allow the facility in Malawi to meet international standards and carry out any further animal trial works.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Rubikah Vimonish, Kelcey D. Dinkel, Lindsay M. Fry, Wendell C. Johnson, Janaina Capell■Peixoto,Reginaldo G. Bastos, Glen A. Scoles, Donald P. Knowles, Maxime Madder, George Chaka and Massaro W. Ueti. "Isolation of infectious Theileria parva sporozoites secreted by infected Rhipicephalus appendiculatus ticks into an in vitro tick feeding system", Parasite \& Vectors. 2021 Dec 24;14(1):616. DOI: 10.1186/s13071-021-05120-7.

--- Page 1 ---

Btissam Asri, Rubikah Vimonish, Massaro Ueti, Leon Nicolaas Meyer, Alec Evans, Mohammed Bouslikhane, Abdelkbir Rhalem, Djamel Tahir, and Maxime Madder. "Assessment of the in vitro tick feeding system for the successful feeding of adult R. appendiculatus ticks" submitted as a short communication to the Medical and Veterinary Entomology journal in May 2022.

A high-level international meeting of parasitologists and ECF experts from three continents, including America, Africa, and Europe, was convened virtually on February 4, 2021 to discuss the project. The main output was an agreement to change the assay from molecular tools the project had been using to in vitro titrations for better quantification of sporozoites.

The main outcome of the meeting was the agreement that the In vitro titration assay was the most optimal assay for quantitating viable T. parva sporozoites. The meeting noted that flowcytometry (Guava) assay at CTTBD still needed to be optimized. Dr. Tanguy Marcotty, an independent ECF consultant, was willing to collaborate in establishing the in vitro titration assay in Morocco. The assay is already established at CTTBD.

In attendance were Dr. Waithaka Mwangi (College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University), Dr. Dirk Geysen (ECF expert, Belgium), Dr. Ine DeGoeyse (ECF expert, Belgium), Dr. George Chaka (Acting Director, CTTBD), Dr. Hermann Unger (International Atomic Energy Agency, Austria), Mr. Leon Meyer (Clinvet), Prof. Maxime Madder (Clinvet), Dr. Tanguy Marcotty (ECF Expert, Belgium), Dr. Thomas Bazarusanga (ECF expert, Rwanda), Dr. David Kalenzi (R\&D; Scientist, CTTBD), Dr. Walter Muleya (Molecular Epidemiologist, University of Zambia), Prof. Willian Witola (Parasitologist, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois), Dr. Nick Nwankpa (Director, PANVAC, Ethiopia), Dr. Charles Bodjo (Scientist, PANVAC, Ethiopia), Dr. Tindih Sheltone Heshborne (ECF scientist, Machakos University, Kenya), Dr. Ben Mans (Parasitologist, ARC-OVI, RSA), Victor Mbao (IDRC), Dr. Massaro Ueti (Project PI, USDA).

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The second paper "Assessment of the in vitro tick feeding system for the successful feeding of adult R. appendiculatus ticks" was not published by the end of the project due to delays in completing experiments. This was mostly a result of COVID 19 lockdowns. It was submitted on May 18, 2022 and is under review.

# Project Outcomes 

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

In East and Central Africa, the most important tick-borne disease of livestock is East Coast fever, caused by the intracellular parasite Theileria parva. More than one million cattle die of East Coast fever annually, resulting in approximately CA\$361 million in losses. Mortality rates approach $90 \%$ in susceptible cattle, and animals that recover are long-term Theileria parva carriers that act as sources of further infection for susceptible cattle.

--- Page 2 ---

The main methods of disease prevention rely on restricting cattle movements, tick control, or immunization. The first two methods are difficult to enforce. The immunization method involves inoculation of cattle with a live vaccine and concurrent long-acting oxytetracycline treatment to minimize clinical signs. Although the vaccine is efficacious, its production is cumbersome and expensive. Additional technical challenges include dose standardization, the requirement for many cattle to determine the dose, and risks associated with tick protein contamination. The requirement for concurrent treatment using long-acting oxytetracycline makes the method even more expensive, consequently reducing adoption.

The in vitro tick feeding system refined in the project is a tool for artificially feeding tick vectors of $T$. parva for isolation and quantification of sporozoites. The field of ECF vaccine manufacturing is challenged with a most cumbersome production process involving significant use of rabbits and cattle both during production and dose titration. An artificial system as the one described here would greatly reduce the number of animals used to produce the vaccine. It can also be used to feed tick vectors of other species of parasites e.g. Babesia spp allowing cheaper and more humane studies of these parasites for vaccine development and other applications.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

This project did not meet all its objectives for a variety of key reasons:
The virtual international meeting of parasitologists and ECF experts that was convened in February 2021 clearly preferred an in vitro titration assay for the project which would have facilitated proper quantification of parasites, but this was never implemented by the research team. This was disappointing because I had recommended this assay at the start of the project when I discovered they were using real time PCR. I further reminded the team about this during a project monitoring meeting in Morocco of November 2019 in the presence of the LVIF Program Leader. Use of the assay could have tested my hypothesis that the team was using too low a dose of parasites in the experiments.

The transfer of technology to CTTBD for the in vitro tick feeding system faced serious delays, as funds could not be transferred to them. This was due to CTTBD not having a system compatible with the USDA financial systems thus preventing a System for Award Management (SAM) registration. This resulted in non-use of the in vitro titration system (which is already set up at CTTBD) as recommended by the ECF experts. This unexpected risk could not have been avoided because no one had anticipated that some organisations could not be registered. A lesson is for GAD and POs to make a financial systems compatibility assessment between collaborator of a project during the project development phase and plan accordingly.

The irradiation experiments were not completed. The irradiated sporozoites could not infect lymphocytes showing either non-viability or too low a dose of starting sporozoites. Further, the Post-Doc (Dr. Kelcey Dinkel) that had been responsible for this project objective left the project for a permanent position in Seattle in October 2020 and the project identified 2 potential candidates from Brazil and Egypt to fill the position. However, this was during the COVID pandemic when the labs were closed, and, consequently, the hire did not take place and no further experiments were set up.

--- Page 3 ---

This project received wrap-around support that had not been designed in the PAD. The extra support given to several projects across LVIF and Innovet-AMR involved a consultancy that looked at commercialisation roadmaps for products in development. Seven key intellectual property assets were identified of which four were background (already existing) and 3 foreground (to be generated in the project). Some confusion arose on who would own the ownership of the final vaccine formulation if irradiation was successful. None of the partners was ready to lay a claim and this is a lesson that, for the future, project partners from the outset need to be clear about patents and ownership of intellectual assets that would result from a research project.

There was ample budget and scope to have an additional female Masters student in Malawi as suggested by the PI. The PO approved this, but the identified candidate later found another training opportunity. The responsible PO suggested to the team to quickly identify another student, but this was not done. The PO arranged with colleagues in Rwanda for a female Masters student which was promptly done. Rwanda was the alternative field trial site for the vaccine had the administrative impasse at CTTBD in Malawi continued. Even this offer of a ready student was not taken up by the project leadership. No concrete reason was provided. Some of the funds to be refunded could have been invested in this effort.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.
Large-scale positive change:
The current ECF vaccine, while effective, has limited use because it is cumbersome to manufacture and is not affordable to smallholder farmers. The goal of this project was to use an innovative technology to improve the vaccine, making it easier to produce, more affordable, and easier to use. The other benefit of this technology was to reduce the number of rabbits used during production of the vaccine. This is a more humane way of vaccine production and supports the Three Rs principle in animal use. The reduced cost of the ECF vaccine (if successful) would result in increased use of the of ECF vaccination as the preferred method for controlling ECF especially by smallholders in sub-Saharan Africa.

Supporting leaders of today and tomorrow:
This principal investigator (PI) is an associate Professor at Washington State University and has extensive experience in conducting research in the biology and vaccine development of tick-borne diseases in Africa. He was supported by 2 scientists, one at AU-CTTBD in Malawi and the other at Clinglobal in Morocco. The project also supported four female researchers: a post-doctoral scientist and a Master's student at Washington State University, a PhD student in Morocco, as well as a PhD student from Kenya. In the PAD, we had indicated that this project was only at a "gender sensitive" rating and as such, having 4 female scientists participate at this level and develop professionally was an outstanding achievement.

Partner of Choice:

--- Page 4 ---

The project was funded through a donor-partnership program comprising IDRC, Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). This project highlights the strengths of IDRC in supporting livestock vaccine innovation critical to potential transformative changes in rural livelihoods. It also highlights IDRC capacity to link northern and southern researchers to develop and implement innovative solutions that are specific for the Low- and Middle-income context.

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: Improve the East Coast fever vaccine by minimizing animal use in vaccine production, standardizing the Theileria parva sporozoite dose, and eliminating the need for concurrent use of oxytetracycline during vaccination.

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: Although the in vitro tick feeding model was optimised, the resulting vaccine did not demonstrate protection when calves were inoculated and later challenged. It seems the dose of the harvested and subsequently inoculated parasites was not sufficient but this could not be verified because the amount of viable parasites were not quantified. Irradiation of the vaccine did not produce an attenuated vaccine.

Specific Objective 1: Optimise a continuous flow in vitro tick feeding system and isolate free Theileria parva sporozoites from it.

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment:
Specific Objective 2: Determine if purified irradiation-attenuated or low doses of non-irradiated T. parva sporozoites provides immune protection against tick derived challenge without causing significant morbidity.

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: This specific objective was not achieved. Irradiation of the vaccine material was carried out, but the team could not detect viability in the so treated parasites. It appears the starting dose of the vaccine material was too low as the assay used was not appropriate.

Specific Objective 3: Titrate a standardized dose of the improved T. parva sporozoite vaccine and validate its efficacy in large scale immunization and experimental infection studies.

4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: The project closed before a viable and protective vaccine was produced. Consequently, there was no material for field dose titration. As a result, $\$ 199,367$ will be refunded to LVIF.

Financial performance

--- Page 5 ---

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

A project monitoring meeting was held in 2019 in Morocco to discuss interim results of the project. It was attended by both the lead PO and the PL. Due to the slow progress on demonstrating that sporozoites from the in vitro system could protect calves, the PO advised the team to focus all efforts on this part of the project. They would be required to show that the system indeed produced viable material that was not only infective but also protected inoculated calves against a lethal challenge. This would serve as a go-no-go step before further work would be allowed for other aspects of the project. The team set up the experiments which progressed up to successfully demonstrating infectivity in calves. However, the challenge experiment could not be completed before project closure as the ticks at the USDA lost infection during the lockdown, those at Clinvet in Morocco were unable to feed and the project made alternative arrangements to import infected ticks from ILRI in Nairobi. The lesson here is that of elucidating the importance of face-to-face meetings in which the teams can be probed deeply to see developing risks in a project and put in place decisive performance steps for further work.

The project received two amendments; the first one on October 1, 2020 and second one on August 3, 2021 for a total of 48 months from the commencement date of April 1, 2018. Both amendments were no-cost extensions. The second was to cover delays due to COVID19 lockdown of USDA laboratories. The go-no-go work still could not be completed because there were technical difficulties, e.g. delays in tick feeding, loss of infected ticks owing to prolonged incubation when the labs were closed and delayed adoption of the in vitro assay.

Following the above, the team presented a request to enable complete go-no-go step in 2022. However, this project had already had 2 extensions and the decision was to have a separate short project, if need be. This will be considered if the go-no-go step is completed. Clinvet has agreed to use its own funds to complete this step.

Slow spending needed constant monitoring. Some of it was due to one sub-grantee (CTTBD) being unregistrable on the USDA's System for Award Management (SAM). USDA had to transfer funds through the other Moroccan based sub-grantee (Clinglobal) after several months of attempting the registration. In future, IDRC would do well to pre-assess eligibility for such registrations of USDA collaborators so that any alternative routes for fund transfers are put in place before or early in the project. If not eligible, the risk of delays or convoluted fund transfer processes should be weighed against the benefits. Due to the slow spending, IDRC is to receive a refund of USD 199,367 (cash on hand) and USD 52,490 in unspent funds.

The project closure had serious delays. The technical report was submitted 3 months later than the due date of April 30, 2022 (submitted July 14, 2022). Several iterations were needed due to insufficient information and errors in the technical presentation of the research results. The financial report was also submitted 3 months late (submitted on August 13, 2022). This followed constant reminders including a final reminder with a threat to refer the case to IDRC legal counsel.

Strategic Considerations
Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

--- Page 6 ---

One unanticipated risk was the use of an inefficient assay to quantitate sporozoites being harvested and injected into calves. Despite repeated advice from the author of this report (who is an ECF expert), the team continued to use real-time PCR instead of an in vitro titration assay that is already tried and tested. To finally convince the team to adopt the later assay, the PO subtly suggested that the PI organise an international meeting of experts to have input into the project. This finally convinced the team to consider the in vitro assay, albeit quite late for the project. The lesson here is that an external party to troubleshoot or implement a process that is clearly needed but not recognised by the team can be called in in subtle ways, but this must be done in good time.

One unanticipated risk was the COVID pandemic. It caused a lot of disruption and delays of over 1 year. This was mitigated by granting a 12-month no-cost extension. However, the impact of COVID lasted longer than anticipated and had an adverse impact on the project. For example, Washington State where the USDA project was based saw some of the worst covid cases and, at one time, there was a Stay Home Order from March 2020 for several weeks and then a total lockdown of laboratory facilities to around June 2021. Medical personnel and veterinarians were required to volunteer to assist in mass immunisation campaigns. The PI was required to volunteer for Covid vaccinations in Washington State which took him away from the project work during most of 2021 just as some of the lab access restrictions were being lifted. Another instance was the delayed progress on the construction and importation of equipment from Europe into Morocco for raring a replacement batch of the ticks that had died at the USDA labs. The equipment was needed to simulate natural daylength to overcome the failure of ticks to feed.

Prolonged COVID 19 lockdowns resulted in the death of ticks that were being incubated at the USDA lab. With the reopening of labs, fresh ticks had to be bred. The tick strain used in Morocco at Clinglobal labs failed to feed in the in vitro system. This was mitigated by importing already infected ticks from ILRI for the go-no-go study.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

All ethical clearances were obtained. To ensure compliance with prescribed authorisations, the PI toured animal facilities in Morocco and Malawi. Inspections at CTTBD revealed the need to improve the animal quarters for good animal welfare. The project had funds to address this, and the improvements were carried out to conform to USDA standards.

# Program Leader comments 

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

This project was selected from the second call of the LVIF (i.e., Call 2/midstream projects). This call sought innovative projects that can improve current vaccines including those involving innovative ways of producing vaccines, and which would have capacity for large scale adoption in the LVIF target countries. To mitigate the high risk of failure inherent in the vaccine discovery and development

--- Page 7 ---

process, these projects were funded for an initial 30-month period with potential for extended support subject to sufficient progress and promising data. While some interesting results were produced, this project did not meet all its key objectives. Admittedly, it was impacted heavily by the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the team appears to have lacked focus in its approach to the project and was, unfortunately, reluctant to follow external advice that could have saved the project time and effort (e.g., lack of adopting the in vitro assay being a case in point). The LVIF team is not recommending any additional funding at this time.

The decision not to continue to fund this project until additional positive results are confirmed is further evidence that the innovative risk mitigation approach being used by the Animal Health team is working. As IDRC continues to support product development projects, we will continue having some unsuccessful initiatives. And that is not only acceptable but is the only way to continue being a thought leader and integrating innovation on our programming. This practice is standard in R\&D; labs of the private sector, and IDRC has an opportunity to integrate this approach more systematically when supporting highly technical (and non-technical) innovations. The program approach of LVIF also allows the team to apply the lessons into the program immediately. For example, one additional lesson for LVIF from this project is that strategies for an effective vaccine or manufacturing process (against ECF or any disease) must be more ambitious and extend beyond laboratory work. An important lesson here is the need to develop strong milestones at the beginning of the project, conduct more frequent monitoring outside of annual reports, and take into consideration all aspects of product development (including a dedicated product profile and providing targeted support to academic teams) to ensure that only objectives contributing to the development of a vaccine that can be manufactured and registered are supported. While many risks are, as described in this PCR, outside of the control of IDRC, the management and learning from the process are always $100 \%$ in the control of IDRC.

One additional aspect to note from this PCR is the importance of strengthening gender aspects of the project - including lessons learned from the wrap-around support provided by the LVIF team. For example, this project did not integrate, initially, a strong gender lens. With IDRC PO support and encouragement, the team successfully balanced the number of women in the research team (and had opportunity to do more). At the programmatic level, the integration of upstream and downstream initiatives also provides the ability to integrate elements, such as gender, in a more systematic way across the portfolio of projects as opposed to project by project.

Kevin Tiessen
Director comments
The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Action Items / Next Steps
A separate short project might be considered depending on the outcome of the go-no-go step that is being completed with one of the collaborators own funding.

# Distribution list 

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program

--- Page 8 ---

Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director of CRFS
CRFS Program team
ESARO staff
VP PPB: Dominique Charron
VP SRP: Julie Shouldice
Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin
Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon
Regional Directors - ESARO
GAD: Helen St-Martin
Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

