---
document_id: PCR 108705 Development of a cross-protective synthetic RNA vaccine against foot and mouth disease (FMD)
document_name: PCR 108705 Development of a cross-protective synthetic RNA vaccine against foot and mouth disease (FMD).docx
original_format: .docx
page_count: 8
chunk_count: 6
---

--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights 

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Confirmed endocytic uptake and expression of nanoparticleencapsulated replicon RNA in pig kidney (PK15) and Madin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) tested cell lines. This finding was important to ensure that the RNA could enter the cells and produce the antigen in both swine and bovine derived cells.

Increased scale of manufacture for replicon RNA expressing the P1■2A region of FMDV and 3Cpro mRNAs. This advances on the process development at the research level. Increase production is important to set the bases for upscaling and to obtain enough mRNA. This was also important to have enough material for all in vivo experiments.

Confirmed replicon expression in porcine cell line. This result shows that the protein is synthesized and expressed by the cells. Once the cell expresses the protein, it can activate the immune system to generate protection.

Generated a novel formulation for O1/Manisa/TUR/69 P1 replicon and A12 3Cpro mRNA combination vaccine that expressed P1 efficiently and generated VP0 fragment. The separation of the 3Cpro mRNA from the replicon was to allow scientists to reduce the dose of 3Cpro mRNA and decrease cell toxicity induced by 3C protease.

Demonstrated IgG antibody responses against O1/Manisa/TUR/69 P1 in murine model by ELISA. Antibodies are part of acquired immune responses that contribute to the elimination of most pathogens.

Evaluation of antibody responses using the viral neutralization assay were performed and the results were promising. This assay is important because it confirms results obtained by ELISA. Additionally, this assay is used to determine the probable capacity of the induced antibodies to neutralize a virus.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Tiba offers programmable RNA vaccine platform to animal health partners, News article on Tiba's work in animal health by Animal Pharm (Agribusiness intelligence, Informa), Nov. 15, 2018, https://animalph arm.agribusinessintelligence.informa.com/AP014903/Tiba-offers-programmable-RNA-vaccine-platform -to-animal-health-partners .

Molecularly defined synthetic delivery systems for RNA. Poulami Talukder. Gordon Research Conference: Biotherapeutics and Vaccines Development, Jan. 6-11, 2019, Scientists, researchers and students from industry and academia.

--- Page 1 ---

Patent or Patent application rights, Know-how / Trade Secret rights, other rights (inc. confidentiality). Formulation of mRNA molecules which encode for particular antigens and are used as part of the vaccine formulation.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The outputs above were of high quality and are commensurate to the purpose and risk level of the first phase of the project. This project generated important information that contributes to scientific knowledge in the areas of virology and immunology, as well as molecular genetics and vaccinology. The knowledge acquired was presented in several conferences that reached students, PIs and investors from the scientific community. Contribution of this research helps advance knowledge on FMD and vaccine development. Some of the findings were not published due to intellectual property sensitivity.

# Project Outcomes 

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The project was funded due to its cutting-edge technology. When the project started, there were no vaccines for humans or animals in the market using this type of technology. Additionally, the project targeted an extremely important disease of cloven-hoofed animals that is difficult to control.

The RNA platform is a new technology that has proven effective against COVID-19. The team developed a similar platform to be used for the prevention of FMD. Results from the immunization study show that the RNA platform can potentially be used in pigs. To develop this platform, it was required experts on molecular biology, virology, chemistry, and immunology.

The team also advanced on the development of a vehicle (formulation) that is needed to protect the RNA and that allows the RNA to enter the cell for the expression of the antigen.

The project also contributed to the understanding of the effects of some components of the FMD viral capsid that cause cytolysis, which is part of the pathogenesis of the disease.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The research was executed with high standards. Some of the deviations from the original milestones were due to the need for troubleshooting problems found during the development of the candidate vaccines. For example, the original target for development was SAT2 lineage viruses. All antigen components necessary to generate the final vaccine composition were successfully cloned, synthesized as RNA, formulated, and expression was confirmed. However, in preliminary tests in mouse models, inconsistent virus neutralizing titers (VNTs) were obtained, and the team concluded that the likely issue was the inherent instability and cytotoxicity of the wild-type empty SAT2 capsid/protease

--- Page 2 ---

constructs that were in use. Using in vitro assays, the team found that SAT2 3C protein exhibited extremely high cytotoxicity. This result prompted the team to find other options to reduce cytotoxicity. The only RNA vaccine candidate that produced a detectible VNT result contained a self-amplifying mRNA (saRNA) construct encoding an engineered P1 polyprotein segment fused with a heterologous, non-cytotoxic protease. Additionally, formulations had to be optimized to ensure O1 P1 processing was maximized, and optimized candidates were advanced to preliminary murine studies. The team used murine models to reduce costs, while testing the candidates. This is a common practice in research. However, results of this animal model can not be transferred to the target species.

The team demonstrated strong IFN $\square$ gamma responses against O1/Manisa/TUR/69 P1 in murine model and identified VP1 region as the primary source of stimulatory epitopes. IFN-gamma is a cytokine used as an indicator of cell-mediated immune response. Cell-mediated immune response is key to control, particularly intracellular pathogens, including the FMDV. However, measuring IFN-gamma is not a direct measure of cell-mediated immune response, which is what the team should have measured directly with other types of assays, such as flow cytometric analysis or cell proliferation assay. Additionally, results in mice are not indicators of the effects of the vaccine in pigs or cattle.

The team demonstrated IgG antibody responses against O1/Manisa/TUR/69 P1 in murine model by ELISA. Antibodies are part of acquired immune responses that contribute to the elimination of most pathogens. However, these ELISAs were adapted, and these results are questionable. Additionally, immune responses in mice are not indicators of the responses generated in pigs and cattle.

Experiments in pigs to test antibody seroconversion were completed. However, the studies were not rigorous enough to provide accurate results. Therefore, they were considered inconclusive.

No experiments in cattle were performed.
How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.
Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change
FMD is a highly contagious viral disease that affect many wild and domestic cloven-footed animals, including pigs and cattle. The disease is estimated to circulate in $77 \%$ of the global livestock population, in Africa, the Middle East and Asia, as well as in a limited area of South America. The annual impact of FMD in terms of visible production losses and vaccination in endemic regions alone amount to between US $\$ 6.5$ and 21 billion. In addition, outbreaks in FMD free countries and zones cause losses of >US\$1.5 billion a year. FMD production losses have a big impact on the world's poorest where more people are directly dependent on livestock. FMD reduces herd fertility leading to less efficient herd structures and discourages the use of FMD susceptible, high productivity breeds. Overall, the direct losses limit livestock productivity affecting food security.

Despite the fact that the project wasn't successful in achieving a second phase, it was still worth funding because it advanced on the knowledge of this new technology and in the understanding of the

--- Page 3 ---

difficulties of designing a vaccine to protect against FMD. The project was able to bring new insights to the field of animal vaccinology. The purpose of this project was to develop a vaccine to prevent FMD in both pigs and cattle using the most recent technology. Had the project been successful, this technology would allow to add or exchange antigens as needed and very quickly allowing prevention of the disease from the predominant variant in a specific region. The availability of a vaccine in the market would have had an important impact on animal welfare, food production, and on the reduction of antimicrobial use. This is also of great importance to achieve healthy food systems. Reduction on the use of antimicrobials to reduce antimicrobial resistance has become a priority in most parts of the world, including Canada.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow
The project included a collaboration between a leading Biotech and research institutions, including Tiba Biotech LLC, Moredun Research Institute (MRI), and Agricultural Research Council - Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute (ARC-OVI). The three lead PIs for each institution were male. The project manager was also male. The team had two female researchers, and one female and one male technicians. The researchers, which included post-doctoral fellows and technicians, received training on the newest molecular techniques. Tiba has showcased its platform in events where Biotech and large pharmaceutical companies have participated.

Be the partner of choice for greater impact
The project is funded through a donor-partnership program, the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund, a partnership between the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Global Affairs Canada and Canada's International Development Research Centre. Additionally, this project highlights the strengths of IDRC in supporting cutting-edge agricultural innovation critical to potentially transformative changes in rural livelihoods, with emphasis on livestock species that are important to women

Objectives
Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.
Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To construct and in vitro validate two RNA-based vaccines against FMDV and demonstrate its efficacy in pigs and cattle.

# 4 Fully met 321 Not met 

Comment: The team developed one candidate RNA-based vaccine instead of two that they put forward in their original proposal. They were able to demonstrate the expression of the FMD viral antigen in both swine and bovine cell lines. The team did extensive testing in murine models. However, there was only one study performed in pigs, where there was measurement of antibody responses. There was no demonstration of efficacy of the candidate vaccine against an active virus challenge in either pigs or cattle, which was one objective in the original proposal. After the evaluation of the project at the end of phase I, this project was supplemented with some modification to the objectives. Nonetheless, the team was not able to properly measure immune responses in pigs and did not conducted experiments in

--- Page 4 ---

cattle, which constituted the fourth and fifth objectives of the revised supplemented proposal.
Specific Objective 1: To develop and optimize a vaccine construct using mRNA technology.
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: New O1 Manisa P1 replicons and 3Cpro mRNAs were synthesized at small-scale. Replicon activity confirmed in swine and bovine cell lines with encoded reporter genes.

Specific Objective 2: To develop and optimize formulation of the vaccine prototype.
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: Four novel dendrimer compounds were synthesized at sufficient scale for preliminary testing, and one lead was selected based on in vitro parameters.

Specific Objective 3: To test the stability of the candidate vaccine and its formulation.
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: The team rightly focused on a formulation which presents an unchanged colloidal stability over 6 months. Pursuing the project with this formulation is however invalidating the results generated with the previous formulation, including the pig studies. The lyophilisation experiment conducted is not conclusive. For example, only three mice were used for in vivo studies and so the results are difficult to analyse due to a low power and not being representative of the target population. Additionally, the formulation currently pursued differs from the vaccine formulation used so far in the in vitro studies and in the mice and pigs in vivo studies.

Specific Objective 4: To determine the immunogenicity of the candidate vaccine in pigs.
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: At the end of the project the team tested the prototype vaccine in pigs. The clinical study carried out is not providing the information intended to collect. The vaccine on test for the first clinical experiment on pigs spent over 2 weeks in uncontrolled temperature conditions during transport. None of the pigs seroconverted against FMDV after the single administration of the vaccine dose, meaning that the candidate vaccine was either not able to mount an immune response in pigs or that it was damaged during transport. After few weeks of interruption of the study, two groups of pigs received a second dose of a second vaccine batch 106 days post-initial dose. All pigs mounted an immune response against FMDV measured by ELISA and virus neutralization test (VNT) by day 14 post-second dose. Although results from the second immunization are promising, the study was conducted in uncontrolled conditions and so, these results are not reliable. Additionally, more controlled studies are needed to demonstrate seroconversion in a larger population of the target species.

Specific Objective 5: To determine the immunogenicity of the candidate vaccine in cattle.
4 Fully met 321 Not met
Comment: The team was not able to start this objective. Most of the work was dedicated to troubleshooting different problems encountered during the development of the vaccine prototype.

Financial performance

--- Page 5 ---

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The financial reports in general went very smoothly and on time. The teams responded quickly. The financial reports have been finalized.

IDRC's analysis of Tiba's financial report determined that personnel and Research Expenses were overspent due to an increase in base salaries and fringe benefits in 2021, and increased costs linked to in vivo work that was conducted during the final 5 months of the project. Because the technology was fully developed by Tiba, they performed most of the research work. Overall, expenditures were in line with the approved budget in USD. There were CAD \$20,784 on savings in the CAD budget due to exchange rate gains that occurred during the last 6 months of the project.

IDRC's analysis of the final financial report determined that Morendum Research Institute (MRI) spent $62 \%$ of the approved CAD grant. There was a balance of CAD \$223,907 remaining unspent at completion. The unspent amount was due to a scientist who was hired for the project but left the position, and there was insufficient time to hire a replacement. MRI performed experiments in pigs to determine immune responses induced by the candidate vaccine with some modifications on the experimental design. The departure of the scientist and the changes that were made to the trial designs contributed to most of the underspending of the project budget. The project also experienced exchange rate gains in the amount of CAD $\$ 9,579$ since approval.

IDRC's analysis of the final financial report determined that Agricultural Research Council had a balance equivalent to CAD $\$ 169,280$ in unused funds on hand. Most of the research was conducted by Tiba. The experiments in pigs were conducted by Morendum. The challenge experiments in Cattle were not conducted and this explains why ARC had most of their budget unspent. "The COVID-19 pandemic negatively affected this project in the fact that there were travel restrictions and project plans for inter-lab collaborations in person. were not possible. In 108705addition, in South Africa, we experienced inherent COVID-19/pandemic issues with supply chain at the institute. The institute was not accessible during level 5 lockdown and employees had to work from home. Also, when lockdown restrictions eased, employees worked on a rotational basis, which was still occurring at the end of the project. The ripple effect was a backlog of orders. In addition, shipment of laboratory products was delayed due to the pandemic and in one example, it took 12 months for a primer that was required for the project to arrive. Work from home resulted in no access to laboratories and no lab work being possible.

# Strategic Considerations 

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Tiba Biotech was ranked as high risk due to its recent establishment, while Moredun Research Institute (MRI) and Agriculture Research Council (ARC) were ranked as low risk institutions. The technical and financial reporting for all institutions was followed as outlined in the PAD.

Another risk recognized in the PAD was a long process that may have arise when registering a synthetic RNA vaccine in LMIC countries. One of the merits of RNA vaccines is that they are not live virus based, and therefore are unlikely to require special regulation. This technology was in early

--- Page 6 ---

discovery and far from reaching market at the time the project was launched. However, regulations around the world changed when two RNA-based vaccines were launched as part of the fight against the COVID pandemic.

LVIF reached for highly cutting-edge research projects with the recognition that not all funded projects, could achieve the expected results. It was anticipated that not all projects would qualify to advance to the second phase. This project was reviewed by external experts on November 30th, 2021. After review, the project was not recommended for additional funding mainly because of a combination of factors, including the complexity of both the technology and the pathogen.

Overall, the risks were manageable, and no further risks were encountered. Although the technology did not advance to the second phase, it had a positive impact in the progress of the technology, particularly in relation to the selected pathogen and the lessons learned during the troubleshooting.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

The proposal was assessed properly. It is difficult to predict whether a vaccine technology will be successful. The RNA-based vaccines against COVID-19 in humans have proven that this technology has great potential. Matching the technology with the pathogen is not an easy task and many times requires test and error. However, the team was able to advance the technology, which might not have been the adequate for FMD. The lead funded institution developed this technology and has experience working with pathogens. The other two institutions have experience working with vaccines and pathogens, including FMDV. No ethical issues were observed and during the work of the project the team was cooperative.

The LVIF team learned that two years for developing a vaccine candidate from discovery to market is almost impossible. It would be important to build a two-month buffer time to set up contracts and hire personnel as well as for equipment procurement to be able to start a project on time and reduce possible delays in the completion of research milestones. This buffer is a common practice in the industry, where times to set up contracts and hiring FTEs are built within a project or within a research milestone. However, most funded projects in academia, including the ones from IDRC, do not include this buffer period, which eats research time. Additionally, industry have embedded decision points, where projects are evaluated to determine if funding would continue and if the project can advance to a different phase. One advantage with the design of the current LVIF program was the inclusion of 2 phases to have a decision point in the middle. At the end of phase 1, all projects from the same cohort were thoroughly evaluated. Only the projects with enough merits to proceed to the second phase were selected to continue. This allowed the LVIF team, including the GSC, to make an informed decision to continue funding a project that could potentially deliver a vaccine. This project was offered an extension/supplement to give the team an opportunity of advancing their technology.

# Program Leader comments 

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide

--- Page 7 ---

specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.
Director comments
The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Reducing animal deaths by investing in vaccines is at the core of IDRC's vision for climate-resilient food systems. Not only the livelihoods of millions of farmers are at risk every year of the looses of their animals, but the planetary boundaries and the climate action require a dramatic intervention to reduce these losses.

This excellent PCR summarizes how IDRC can continue supporting cutting-edge technologies in the areas aligned to the Center's priorities. The phases approach taken by LVIF allowed to support the research of highly risk innovative products while pulling out investments when the technology cannot demonstrate the expected results. As presented by PO and PL, this practice is very standard in R\&D; labs of the private sector, and IDRC has an opportunity to integrate this approach when supporting technological innovations.

Congratulations to the LVIF team and the lead POs of this initiative for grantees' rigorous support and follow-up. The quality of their reports and recommendations was crucial to informing the governance body and external experts of LVIF.

I approve this PCR
Santiago Alba-Corral
Director Programs. Climate Resilient Food Systems
Action Items / Next Steps
Distribution list
Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

