---
document_id: PCR 109271 - Engineered Vaccines against Hemorrhagic Septicemia in Ruminants – Phase 2
document_name: PCR 109271 - Engineered Vaccines against Hemorrhagic Septicemia in Ruminants – Phase 2.pdf
original_format: .pdf
page_count: 9
chunk_count: 22
---

--- Page 0 ---

| Project Number and Name | 109271 - Engineered Vaccines against Hemorrhagic <br> Septicemia in Ruminants - Phase 2 |
| :-- | :-- |
| Responsible Officer | Armando Heriazon |
| Former Responsible Officer | Musa Mulongo |
| Principal Investigator | Anthony Schryvers, Trevor Moraes, and Takele A. <br> Tefera |
| Recipient Institution (grantee) | University of Calgary, University of Toronto and <br> National Veterinary Institute |
| Location: Country | Canada \& Ethiopia |
| Location: Region | Africa |
| Area of research impact | Africa |
| Internal Funding | IDRC |
| External Funding | BMGF and GAC |
| Project Start Date | 12 November 2019 |
| Project Completion Date | 12 December 2023 |
| Program theme sector | CRFS-AH |
| Strategic framework indicator |  |
| Author | Armando Heriazon |
| Date of Report | 11 July 2024 |

# Project Abstract 

Hemorrhagic septicemia (HS) is an acute, and often fatal disease impacting mainly cattle and buffaloes in tropical regions of the world, especially in Asian and African countries. Hemorrhagic septicemia epidemics are devastating and jeopardize the economic return of animal production. Current prevention of HS is done using bacterins based on the $P$. multocida capsule. Although providing good protection, these vaccines typically suffer from short-lived protection requiring repeated vaccination and serotype specific protection requiring frequent matching of circulating field strains with the vaccine. In addition, severe, unpredictable, and fatal anaphylactic reactions occur in a minor proportion of vaccinated animals, most likely due to poor cold-chain management.

In 2016, the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF) supported a project led by the University of Calgary. This project was one of eight funded by LVIF with focus on the use of cutting-edge technologies to advance livestock vaccine development. To mitigate the high risk of failure inherent in the vaccine discovery and development process, these projects were funded for an initial 2-year period with potential for extended support subject to sufficient progress and promising data.

The goal of Phase 2 of this project was to advance the vaccine to a proof-of-concept study acceptable to regulatory standards. The team aimed to use the $P$. multocida surface lipoprotein (PmSLP), discovered in phase 1, a novel surface protein of $P$. multocida serotype B from HS and to develop an HS-PmSLP/TpbA hybrid antigen using cutting edge protein structural design to induce protection against hemorrhagic septicemia serotype B in ruminants. It was hypothesized that this approach would result in an HS vaccine that confers protection to all serotypes and for longer time, as well as be safer than the current commercial vaccines.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

--- Page 1 ---

# 1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative? 

The team generated a phylogenetic analysis of pubicly accessible PmSLP sequences of cattle from online databases.

The team sequenced the PmSLP gene from eight disticnt local African HS strains. This was important to determine the variability of the gene.

The team was able to produce HS-PmSLP necessary for the characterization of the antigen and its in vivo evaluation.

The team conducted studies to determine dose response and duration of antibody responses of Bos taurus. The serum anti-PmSLP antibodies were present for up to three years after immunization. This is important to achieve long lasting protection against HS.

The team achieve proof-of-concept with up to 100\% protection against $P$. multocida serotypes $B$ and $E$ with a homologous and heterologous challenge in Bos indicus.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

## 2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Reverse vaccinology-based identification of a novel surface lipoprotein that is an effective vaccine antigen against bovine infections caused by Pasteurella multocida. PLOS Pathogens, 2023 (open access).

Vaccination with PmSLP-3, a surface lipoprotein from Hemorrhagic Septicemia causing strains of Pasteurella multocida, elicits long-term, robust protection against serogroup B and E strains in cattle. Frontiers in Immunology, 2024 (open access).

Characterization of the Immune Response to Conventional and Advanced Animal Vaccines. Frontiers Research. Submitted to journal (in review).

Patent Application Project Invention "Veterinary Vaccines and Methods for the Treatment of Pasteurella Multocida Infections in Food Production Animals".

Training of two Master students and two PhD students.
The team conducted several meetings with both global and local vaccine manufacturers, commercialization consultants, as well as government agencies to develop strategies for vaccine commercialization. The team is in negotiations with a manufacturer from India, who is interested on taking the product towards commercialization.

## 3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality. Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The outputs above were of high quality and are commensurate to the purpose and risk level of the project. This project generated important information that contributes to scientific knowledge in the areas of bacteriology, immunology, and vaccinology, as well as molecular genetics. The knowledge acquired was presented in several conferences that reached students, PIs and investors from the scientific community. Contribution of this research helps advance knowledge

--- Page 2 ---

# PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

**IDRC CRDI**

on HS and vaccine development. Some of the findings were not published due to intellectual property sensitivity.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

### 4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

*Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?*

The project was funded due to its cutting-edge technology. The technology included a scaffold protein HS PmSLP with the addition of loops with the TbpA2 protein creating a hybrid. Six hybrid antigens were designed, cloned, and expressed. This contributed to the advancement of molecular genetics and the field of proteomics, as well as vaccinology.

The project generated data on immune responses to HS in two different species of cattle and of different ages. The use of younger animals in Canada was important because it was difficult to obtain cattle younger than 6 months old in Ethiopia. Age is an important factor for the severity of the disease. Both bovine species are susceptible to the disease, although *Bos indicus* is predominant in Africa. However, local African breeds belong to the *Bos taurus* classification.

This project also advanced on the field of protein expression. Two systems to produce the antigens were under investigation. One was the soluble cytoplasmic protein with the formation of inclusion bodies. The system was used for all the *in vivo* experiments. The team proposed a second one or secretory system, which is still under development. The secretory system is expected to give higher yield of antigen in comparison to the cytoplasmic inclusion bodies.

### 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

*Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?*

The original objectives of this project were aimed at the development of PmSLP / TbpA2 hybrid antigens; however, over the course of the project the team found that the hybrid was difficult to produce and that TbpA2 was not providing the expected immune response. It was decided to pursue the use of HS-PmSLP as the only antigen due to its properties, the possibility of producing it without alteration of its immunogenic properties, and the high immune response that it induced.

Vaccine and reagent shipments to Ethiopia proved difficult at times. The shipment of the initial vaccine was delayed with no cold chain. However, data from the protection studies at NVI prove that despite these suboptimal transportation conditions, the efficacy of the lyophilized protein was maintained. These are scenarios that are likely to occur during use of vaccines in the field in LMIC countries, so while this was not a formal study of stability, it provided a good indication that HS-PmSLP will maintain its efficacy under field use conditions. The serology kits and reagents for the duration of immunity and cross protection study at NVI did not clear customs, therefore no serology data was delayed for two studies.

In all challenge experiments NVI was including their own vaccine as a comparison for safety and efficacy of the candidate vaccine. This is usually done for marketing/sales purposes, but it is not required for regulatory purposes. Therefore, this comparison was not necessary and was only being used to expand the testing of NVI's vaccine. IDRC recommended not to include NVI's commercial vaccine in the *in vivo* experiments and instead, to focus on increasing the number of animals per group by reducing the number of groups to obtain higher statistical power. The elimination of the commercial vaccine treated group also reduced the budget for each clinical trial allowing the execution of an additional challenge experiment that was necessary.

During the first year of the project (2020), the global SARS-CoV2 pandemic and the work disruptions associated with it made it difficult to meet the milestones. The LVIF team provided an extension that helped the team reach their milestones.

*Last Revised March 2021*

--- Page 3 ---

# PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

**IDRC CRDI**

Some milestones were modified for the benefit of the project. For example, the minimum age that cattle can be acquired in Ethiopia is 6 months or older. This was leaving a knowledge gap with younger animals, which are more susceptible to the disease. Therefore, it was decided to test immune responses of 3-month-old calves in Canada. The duration of immune response was also followed longer than planned, which provided important results, such as a high antibody titer for at least 18 months post-immunization. Another important addition was changing the challenge model usually performed in Ethiopia with a homologous strain to a heterologous challenge. Protection against a heterologous challenge is important to prove efficacy and predict protection in farm conditions.

## 6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project sought to test a unique technology to develop a vaccine that protects against *P. multocida* in bovine. It offers a promising alternative to reduce the use of antimicrobials in cattle farms. The new vaccine technology has the potential to increase bovine health and reduce the need for antimicrobials. This was a discovery project, so it was not expected to have a finalized product at the end of the program. The expectation was to achieve a proof-of-concept study, and the team met this goal. Additionally, there is a strong need for a vaccine that provides high efficacy and is safe. By reducing infections in cattle, it also helps reduce economic loss, while increasing food security and reducing waste.

This project tackled an important gap: lack of innovative technological solutions to address some of IDRC's Development Outcomes. Thus, the project laid the foundation upon which subsequent work will be built to ultimately contribute to IDRC's Development Outcomes, especially "improving health for all". This is the first recombinant protein vaccine that could fit the African market for hemorrhagic septicemia. In general, vaccines contribute to the "enhancing food and nutrition security" development outcome by reducing animal losses from disease and contributing to a sustainable animal health/production system for the future. The reduction in AM use also contributes to increased food safety. Healthy animals are also more likely to adapt to climate change. Vaccines are an important tool to improve animal health, which has a positive impact in production, and the reduction of antimicrobial use and AMR.

This team involved NVI, which is a government funded vaccine manufacturing company. NVI's members have strong ties with local farmers. Additionally, this team has been in contact with LMIC's company, one of them, based in India, has shown great interest in producing and commercializing the vaccine. This contributes to private sector engagement at the level of product development.

This vaccine has the potential to reach market. It is important to note that the LVIF program has come to an end and no further funding will be provided to continue the development of the vaccine. Therefore, in an effort to continue supporting this technology, IDRC reached out to Global Alliance for Livestock Veterinary Medicines (GALVmed), a funding agency based in the UK that supports stakeholders to make livestock health products available, accessible, and affordable to people living in poverty. GALVmed is interested in continuing supporting the future phases of product development of this candidate vaccine and they are currently in negotiations with the team.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

### Meeting Project Objectives

*Last Revised March 2021*

--- Page 4 ---

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To design and test commercially viable, engineered antigens capable of inducing a broadly cross-protective immune response against important serotypes of Hemorrhagic septicemia.
$\square 4$ Fully met
$\boxtimes 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To generate HS-PmSLP scaffold and test it for safety and efficacy in cattle.
$\boxtimes 4$ Fully met
$\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: To generate HS-PmSLP/TbpA2 hybrid and test it for safety and efficacy in cattle experiments.
$\square 4$ Fully met
$\boxtimes 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 3: To develop a proof-of-concept safety and efficacy experiment with the selected vaccine candidate using standards that meet regulatory and industry thresholds.
$\boxtimes 4$ Fully met
$\square 3$
$\square 2$
$\square 1$ Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE 

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The granting process went smoothly, mainly due to having experienced funding the research institutions involved in the project. Moving the project from phase I to phase II also facilitated the research agreement and granting processes. In general, the financial reporting for all components went smoothly apart from the final report.

The University of Calgary submitted their final report 2 days before the end of the program. The financial department claimed to be very busy despite IDRC's requests for submission of the report for close to three months. The University of Calgary submitted three financial reports due to mistakes made by the University's financial department in the first two reports. In the first

--- Page 5 ---

financial report, the assessment showed that the University of Calgary had in hand CA\$77,585. A letter was sent to the $U$ of Calgary requesting the return of the money that was not used and that corresponded to the amount mentioned above. As mentioned, this financial report was submitted two days before the end of the program. Upon receiving the letter, the University of Calgary argued that there was some error in the calculations and that it should have been $\sim$ CAD 27,100 in their favour. In the second financial report, the assessment showed that IDRC owed $\$ 2,800$ to the University of Calgary. The University of Calgary contested the amount arguing that the issue was that the Budget Balance Summary was not updated to align with the prior year. This was because the template did not allow them to update the numbers. Since there were still some concerns by the University of Calgary regarding the financial assessment, IDRC requested a third and last assessment and proof of expenses. The third financial analysis showed 25,700 CAD in favour of the University of Calgary, which was closes to what they originally claimed IDRC owed them. However, the second and third financial reports were submitted after the program was closed. Therefore, the only money available was 17,204 CAD, which was paid to the University of Calgary.

The University of Toronto submitted the last financial report late. However, there was time to review the report and send the payment before the end of the program.

NVI submitted their reports on time, including their final financial report. The final travel for the team to a meeting in Canada was not done. A piece of equipment (bioreactor) that was originally included in the budget, was not purchased. NVI purchased the fermenter through another grant (109618) and so, IDRC recommended the team not to purchase this equipment as the project was about to end. The money was transferred to conduct a clinical trial that was necessary to achieve the milestones. This component had CA\$56,329 on savings.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS 

## 9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

One of the identified risks was the technology, particularly related to the development of an HSPmSLP/TpbA hybrid antigen. This technology was difficult to produce and did not provide the expected results. To minimize the risk the team proposed to use PmSLP as the only antigen. This improved the production and the efficacy of the antigen. Close communications with the PO made it effective to correct the course of the project and to focus on the most effective candidate. Some milestones had to be adjusted to be able to improve the outcomes of the research and achieve them. This allowed the team to succeed in their research, while investigating areas not originally planned but of great importance. This approach is common in scientific research, and it was considered as part of the technological risks. Keeping the focus on the main goal, which is to develop a vaccine against HS, was obtained by using the industry standard approach for product development.

Finding a private sector partner was proven to be challenging. The disease is important for LMIC countries only, most of which are in Africa and Southeast Asia, where the market is fragmented. Therefore, little interest has been expressed by large pharmaceutical companies. NVI has expressed strong interest on acquiring the license to sell the vaccine. However, they mentioned that they did not have the economic resources to purchase the license. Additionally, NVI does not have the research capability to invest on the process development of the candidate, which is needed to pave the way to manufacturing and commercialization of the vaccine. In an effort to continue funding this candidate vaccine, the PO reached out to diverse stakeholders, one of them

--- Page 6 ---

being GALVmed. GALVmed has expressed interest on continuing funding this vaccine and hopefully, to take it to market.

NVI's contribution to the project was mainly challenge experiments. The technology was developed by the PIs from the University of Calgary and University of Toronto. They do have a patent on this technology. NVI is interested on getting the rights, but they do not have money to expand the patent to cover, at least, Ethiopia. They also do not have the money to continue the work on process development that is needed for the vaccine to move it towards commercialization. GALVmed was the only funder willing to continue funding this project. They determined that NVI did not have the expertise, equipment, or capacity to continue the research and move this vaccine forward in the product development pipeline. Through another project, a scientist from NVI received training to use the fermenter but only for virus production. However, he left NVI a month after receiving the training. I do agree with GALVmed's assessment in that NVI does not have any research experience in process development, which is needed for this project. GALVmed is aware that NVI did the challenge studies and decided that an expert in process development with capabilities of producing and distributing the vaccine in Africa was needed.

One risk that was not contemplated was the COVID-19 pandemic. The pandemic impacted mobilization, use of the research facilities, and acquisition of reagents. This was addressed on time by providing an extension with supplement to the team.

# 10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed. 

There were no risks that emerged throughout the project or problems/challenges related to ethics. The ethics approvals were received as requested and before the start of the experiments involving animals.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

This project was funded through the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF), which was cofunded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and IDRC. The fund was a $57 \$$ CAD partnership of 8 years. It ended in March 2024. LVIF adopted a strategic model that intervened at key entry points in the vaccine development, production, and access continuum. The Fund carried out research activities along three broad streams: cuttingedge vaccine development, vaccine improvement and manufacturing, and vaccine demand, access, and use. In the cutting-edge vaccine development stream, IDRC launched an open call for proposal that funded very upstream research projects. It was decided to fund a second phase of these successful projects, if they could demonstrate that they had reached proof of concept in the first phase. This process included a very rigorous review by IDRC staff as well as external reviewers from the private sector. The Fund supported eight projects through the initial discovery phase covering novel vaccine development for a range of livestock diseases (e.g. African Swine Fever, Avian Flu, and Foot and Mouth Disease), with several promising projects subsequently given Phase 2 funding to take the vaccines towards industry proof of concept. Grantees at this phase are primarily research institutes and universities. Overall, LVIF has thus far had mixed success and underperformed against its key long-term outcome targets, which were quite ambitious and therefore difficult to achieve. However, although there are only a few examples of

--- Page 7 ---

newly validated vaccine candidates and market ready vaccines so far, there has been some progress towards proof of concept for the majority of phase 2 projects.

This specific LVIF project aimed to develop an engineered vaccines against hemorrhagic septicemia in ruminants and to advance the vaccine to a proof-of-concept study acceptable to regulatory standards. The hypothesis was that the HS-PmSLP/TpbA hybrid antigen would induce protection against all serotypes of hemorrhagic septicemia in ruminants. The main key result was a proof-of-concept with up to $100 \%$ protection against P. multocida serotypes B and E.1011; this is quite amazing results. Considering these results, IDRC staff worked to pursue this project through BMGF and GALVmed. The project was successful in securing funding with GALVmed to continue developing the vaccine and hopefully commercializing it.

Renee Larocque
Program Leader

# Director comments 

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Another fascinating project and research pathway in two phases that has led to promising results and a potentially highly impactful solution to disease prevention in large ruminants. Should further success be realised through the now GALVmed-funded work this could have large economic value for farmers and for food systems resilience.

As I have noted in other LVIF PCRs, despite the advancement of methodological capacity, new vaccine technologies and improved delivery systems, several of the LVIF projects highlighted the challenges with marketability of vaccines and the weaknesses in African manufacturing of vaccines that limit the African countries' ability to ensure that the vaccines of most importance reach a majority of livestock farmers. It is therefore all the more apt that we have now been able to use surplus LVIF funding to support a project focused on strengthening vaccine technology transfer and manufacturing capacity (new project 110698). There remains important work to do as we consider future IDRC program priorities.

I look forward to our discussions and planning toward IDRC's contributions to animal production within a food systems resilience and lens.

I commend the LVIF team and approve this PCR.
Greg Hallen
Acting Director, CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

Click here to enter text.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Click here to enter text.

--- Page 8 ---

Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

