--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

This research support project resulted in a total of 43 reports from commissioned studies and stakeholder consultations.

One of the most important outputs was a series of 23 disease monographs which informed the program (LVIF) on the disease itself but also the state of vaccine research for each of the livestock diseases. This was useful knowledge for developing the 1st and 2nd call for proposals run by LVIF.

The research support project held various stakeholder consultations in Senegal, Ethiopia, Kenya and Bangladesh. In each country, consultations were held with experts and farmers (separately). And in addition, 2 gender focused consultations were held with women farmers in Kenya and Bangladesh. These consultations enabled the program to understand key problematics and know various stakeholders in each of these countries.

In addition, the LVIF team drafted an analysis report to consolidate all the learnings

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

- Environmental Management Plan
- Environmental Management Plan
- Disease Monographs: Disease Monographs
- Stakeholder Consultations
- Stakeholder consultation Ethiopia
- Stakeholder consultation Senegal
- stakeholder consultation Bangladesh
- stakeholder consultation Kenya
- stakeholder consultation gender
- Situation Analysis on Legislative, Regulatory and Veterinary Support Systems
- LRVE Kenya
- IRVE Vietnam
- LRVE Ethiopia

--- Page 1 ---

LRVE Bangladesh

LRVE Malawi

LRVE Senegal

Situation Analysis on Manufacturing Capacities:

- Vaccine manufacturer Africa
- Vaccine manufacturer Asia
- Gender analysis report and supporting tools: gender report
- Scoping Studies Summary: Scoping Studies Summary

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Most of the commissioned research and/or consultations were of very high quality. The only report that did not meet expectations was the Gender Report. The consultant hired was highly qualified and knowledgeable, however this did not translate in the actual report which was poorly written. Therefore, no additional gender tools for researcher were requested and developed at the time.

## Project Outcomes

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Initially this series of scoping studies (mostly the disease monographs as well as the stakeholder consultations) were meant to inform the selection of three to five priority livestock diseases for the call for proposals. However, in the process of this work, it was decided to not prioritize diseases and leave the list of diseases that LVIF would support to the original 23. No clear reasoning for this decision is known to the author of this PCR. The other scoping studies, especially the manufacturing capacities as well as the legal and regulation situation analysis were highly important to understand local context regarding vaccine development, regulation, production and distribution. It enabled the LVIF team to learn about important stakeholders in this area of research – stakeholders with whom we collaborated and continue to collaborate with. The LVIF team drafted a summary of the scoping studies (#7 in section 2) which allows for a quicker overview of all the knowledge and information gathered.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

One of the main goals of doing these various scoping studies was to prioritize the livestock diseases on which the program would focus which ended up not happening. It is difficult to justify all this work without having done any prioritization. The work of the scoping studies was a lot of resources for selecting the consultants, monitoring the work of consultants and delivering food quality reports. This

--- Page 2 ---

work was a lengthy process which used quite of bit of funds.

The InnoVet-AMR program learned from this and decided to hold a large scoping workshop at the beginning of the program and invite various experts in different fields in order to focus the scope of the upcoming program. This was one event as opposed to multiple scoping studies. The scoping workshop seemed more efficient, even though a lot of information was collected through the multiple scoping studies.

How did this project contribute one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the Strategic Plan. Provide specific numbers where possible.

Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change

This research support project aimed to generate knowledge on key players and issues in the livestock vaccine landscape in order to support the selection of three to five priority livestock diseases on which the Fund will focus. The selection of the priority diseases did not happen. This approach to selecting the priority livestock diseases would have ensured that the vaccines developed through the Fund would impact the biggest number of livestock smallholders.

Be the partner of choice for greater impact

This research support project facilitated the identification of key partners from the private sector, governments and civil society and enable the Fund to bring together public sector research organizations, pharmaceutical and biotech company, regulators, non-governmental organizations and representatives of livestock holders to maximize the impact of newly identified and existing vaccine candidates.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To commission a series of research to refine the focus of the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF), to identify key players and characterize the livestock vaccine landscape as well as support the selection of three to five priority livestock diseases on which the Fund will focus.

4 Fully met 3 X 2 1 Not met

Comment: It is difficult to comment on this as no prioritization was done prior to the first call for proposals of LVIF. However, it is hard to determine if this was harmful to the program as a strong portfolio of projects has been developed.

Specific Objective 1: Objective 1: To prepare an Environmental Management Plan

4 Fully met 3 X 2 1 Not met

Comment:

--- Page 3 ---

This report was of high quality and thoroughly used at the beginning of projects to ensure that all environmental aspects were considered in the development of vaccines. This was also requested by Global Affairs Canada.

Specific Objective 2: To prepare 20 disease monographs (on previously identified diseases)

Comment: All 23 disease monographs were well completed and are published on the IDL IDRC library. These documents even though not used for prioritization of livestock disease have been very good reference documents. Global Affairs Canada and other partners have found them to be highly useful (especially in guiding the development of their Ag Results program).

In addition, a good number of opportunities targeting the development of new vaccines as well as promising vaccine candidates were identified. Just as important, some downstream opportunities have been highlighted that can be supported with the potential for high impact. These range from increasing the efficacy of existing vaccines by proper matching with field strains, improving existing vaccines to simply adapting vaccines that have been successfully used in some regions for other similarly infected regions.

X4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 3: To prepare, organize and conduct various stakeholder consultations (in selected countries)

Comment: All stakeholder consultations were well executed and filled with highly useful local and contextual information even though they were not used to prioritize livestock diseases. They allowed for establishing new contacts with various stakeholders and understanding the needs of small holder farmers regarding vaccines. One example is their concern with low quality vaccines produced by state-led laboratories.

X4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 4: To prepare a situation analysis on manufacturing capabilities in the regions of focus

x4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment: The reports were well produced and of high quality. The information collected allowed LVIF to understand the manufacturing capabilities in LMICs and how to better support them. This information was used to develop the 2nd LVIF call for proposals to improve vaccines. A series of 10 recommendations (around packaging, thermostability, quality assurance, etc.) based on these reports have been formulated and can be found in the summary report: Scoping Studies Summary

Specific Objective 5: To prepare a situation analysis on legislative, regulatory and veterinary support systems (in selected countries)

X4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment: Good quality reports were produced which provided valuable information on various aspects of vaccine development, regulation, production and distribution. These scoping studies have provided important representative insights especially for the LVIF's stream of work that will be focusing on vaccine distribution and administration. The LVIF projects are affected by distinct government policies

--- Page 4 ---

and country specific veterinary systems and LVIF will need to be aware of each of these. In addition, LVIF will have to consider the importance of having a multi-faceted, broad and holistic approach for the success of downstream projects.

Specific Objective 6: To prepare a gender analysis report and supporting tools

■4 Fully met ■3 ■ 2 X1 Not met

Comment: This report was of low quality and required an abundant amount of back and forth with the consultant to try to get to a quality level report. The consultant was knowledgeable, but it never translated in a good report. However, the report suggests LVIF supports affirmative action for more women to be involved in research teams. Apparently, this could ensure products are designed with benefits for both women and men in mind from the outset. LVIF could leverage a requirement for women inclusion in research teams to support this.

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The commissioning of around 40 reports required an immense amount of resources to produce the terms of References, find the right consultants, monitor the work of the consultants, review the reports, organize the stakeholder consultations, etc. It was highly demanding for programs, procurement as well as GAD. This also requested quite a large amount of time and funds (500K CAD).

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

The main risk identified in the PAD was the unforeseen delays in implementing the various activities specified above. These delays included the time needed to identify the right consultants and the length of time needed to follow standard processes both within and outside IDRC. Receiving quality products without delays from the various consultants also represented some risks. The risks were rightfully highlighted even though, we were lucky that only one report was not deemed of high quality. However, the time it took for Program Officers to review the reports in order to get high quality products is not to be ignored.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

No ethical issues were observed during the work of the project.

## Program Leader / Manager comments

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

--- Page 5 ---

In reviewing early program documents, the initial workplan for LVIF was to use the majority of the first year to hold a series of global consultations and develop commissioned reports to strategically inform the direction of the program. This resulted in an impressive number of high-quality documents and the team should be commended for the considerable amount of effort put into this exercise. If short of time, I encourage everyone to read (or re-read) the summary document.

Although the prioritization exercise was not completed, a number of the key documents continue to be used both internally (e.g., ongoing environmental management of LVIF projects, positioning the program for a second phase, etc) and externally (e.g., Global Affairs Canada and other partners have found the disease monographs to be highly useful, especially in guiding the development of their Ag Results program). The program will continue to use relevant scoping studies to develop new programming in climate resilient livestock systems.

Two important lessons have emerged from this project and used to successfully inform future programming of both LVIF and InnoVet-AMR. When the InnoVet-AMR program was being developed, it was decided to host one multi-sectoral, interdisciplinary pre-implementation workshop (at Wilton Park) to inform the design and direction of the new program. That workshop contributed to prioritizing AMR research and development priorities to better target future calls for proposals and ensure selection of high-calibre research projects. It also successfully positioned IDRC as a leader in AMR and helped to solidify our partnership with the UK DOH.

Second, in response to the challenges encountered in developing the gender report, the Animal Health program decided to focus additional resources into this critical area of programming. In 2019, the LVIF program funded a cohort of projects that focus on empowering women as entrepreneurs, as livestock farmers, and as service providers in the livestock vaccines distribution and delivery chain. This set of four projects are all led by gender experts, rather than having a gender expert added to a team of animal health/vaccine experts. Using this approach reduced the risk of gender issues becoming sidelined and leading to gender results of a lower quality. The lessons learned in this stream of research are being used to design support packages for on-going projects and will be incorporated into future innovation development and delivery programming.

Kevin Tiessen

Program Leader

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Two important lessons have emerged from this project and used to successfully inform future programming of both LVIF and InnoVet-AMR. When the InnoVet-AMR program was being developed, it was decided to host one multi-sectoral, interdisciplinary pre-implementation workshop (at Wilton Park) to inform the design and direction of the new program. That workshop contributed to prioritizing AMR research and development priorities to better target future calls for proposals and ensure selection of high-calibre research projects. It also successfully positioned IDRC as a leader in AMR and helped to solidify our partnership with the UK DOH.

--- Page 6 ---

Second, in response to the challenges encountered in developing the gender report, the Animal Health program decided to focus additional resources into this critical area of programming. In 2019, the LVIF program funded a cohort of projects that focus on empowering women as entrepreneurs, as livestock farmers, and as service providers in the livestock vaccines distribution and delivery chain. This set of four projects are all led by gender experts, rather than having a gender expert added to a team of animal health/vaccine experts. Using this approach reduced the risk of gender issues becoming sidelined and leading to gender results of a lower quality. The lessons learned in this stream of research are being used to design support packages for on-going projects and will be incorporated into future innovation development and delivery programming.

Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS
## Action Items / Next Steps
## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Area, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Area, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

PAD: 108165 - Approval of Project Characterizing the livestock vaccine landscape and selecting the priority livestock diseases f.pdf

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
