--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Policy Development: In phase 1, ICIPE worked to ensure that insects were no longer considered as contaminants in animal feed to enable development of feeds with insect protein. In phase 2, to scale up production and commercialise the products, three new standards on insect-based feed were developed and published in December 2020: (1) Production and handling of insects for food and feed – Code of practice; (2) Edible insects' products; and (3) Products containing edible insects. The partnership between Kenya Bureau of Standards (KEBS) and ICIPE and working closely with the private sector agencies such as Sanergy, Ecodudu, Insectipro, Treasure Feeds has delivered 15 insect-based product certifications out of 25 applications submitted. The certification will support individual farmers, multinational companies and processing industry players interested in insects, who can now get accreditation to enable their products to be sold worldwide. Another standard for BSF frass fertiliser is under development. Its utilisation will further open market opportunities for local farmers and entrepreneurs and boost confidence among the target users.

Gender Inclusive Business Models: Women represent more than 60% of producers in the livestock and fish farming industries. This sector represents one of the few opportunities for the poor, unprivileged and unemployed women to sustainably earn a living. INSFEED 2 paid particular attention to the role of women and youth in insect farming to promote gender equity through the creation of new jobs that would boost the income generation and livelihood resilience of smallholder farmers in the tropics. Through project interventions in Kenya, 69 and 31% of male and female farmers, respectively, are actively involved in insect farming. Among these, 77%, practice cyclic model (producing BSF and using it in own pig and poultry farms, reducing uncertainties of lack of markets while also enjoying 'low' protein input prices), 18% use the market driven model (farmers' normal production for the market, in which case they can negotiate their prices), and 5% practice the out-grower model (small scale farmer produces and sells to a medium to large scale producer or business under contractual arrangements). Women strongly favoured the out-grower business model than men because it enabled access to inputs and information and assured a market for their products. These results point to the need to further develop gender responsive business model incubations adapted to the specific needs and capacities of male and female BSF farmers but to also include upscaling strategies that ensure women and men farmers use the most appropriate, profitable, and sustainable business models in their BSF production marketing.

Empowering Livelihoods: The evidence generated by the project indicates the potential of transforming livelihoods if the insect for feed industry is well utilised. For example, substituting current fish and soybean protein with insect meal in the entire poultry sector would create 25,000 – 252,000 jobs of which 3300-33,000 new jobs would specifically be in the commercial poultry sector. This translates to reducing poverty for 3.2 million people, especially in the urban areas. Also, by adopting Frass fertilizer (FF), a farmer increases their net income 5 – 15-fold compared to BSF farming alone. Further, feedstock with a 20% inclusion of biochar would also increase net income by 10 – 64% for BSF larvae and FF production compared to other feedstocks. Maize grown on farms treated with Frass fertiliser yields 29 – 44% higher net income than those treated with commercial organic fertilizer. The role and potential of insect farming in the circular economy justifies the opportunities for future investments that would lead to enhanced sustainability for agriculture and food systems, especially for smallholder

--- Page 1 ---

farmers in low- and middle-income countries.

Feed Industry Development and Employment Creation: In Kenya, over 103 private companies and young entrepreneurs have been established from this project to farm BSF for business. Examples of these enterprises include: The Insectary Ltd, InsectPro Farm; Insect Research Ltd, BioBuu Kenya Ltd, Kenya; Ecodudu Ltd; ProteinMaster Ltd; NutriEnto Ltd and many others. These insect farms are not stand alone but are linked to feed millers (e.g., Treasure Feeds Ltd). InsectPro Farm is the second largest new private insect farm in Kenya producing over 60 tons of dried BSF per month and is packaging and commercializing dried BSF products for various feed manufacturers. Leveraging on this success, InsectPro has received US$200,000 in financial support from the Dutch Sustainable Trade Initiative (IDH). Sanergy Ltd is now the largest national BSF producer and can produce over 250 tons/month of dried BSF larvae for national feed manufacturers and for the export market. Several co-investments have been undertaken in Sanergy to help scale, sustainably, the production of BSF larvae to boost livestock and fish farming. BioBuu Kenya Ltd received financial support of US$ 750,000 from BioInnovate Africa to scale up BSF production while the County government of Nyandarua supported youth groups involved in BSF Farming from the CultiAF youth project with the United States International University (project 108867) with 1 million Kenyan shillings (CA$ 11000). Through the project, 1,325 youth have secured dignified and fulfilling employment in the sector. The linkages between private sector, government, and development agencies will ensure the research from INSFFED 2 is well utilised beyond the project timeline, reaps benefits for smallholder farmers and continues to develop well into the future. This project has led to the establishment of an Emerging Insect Technology Hub (EIT-Hub), a collaboration between AgriFutures, Australia, ACIAR and icipe. This Hub will deliberate issues including knowledge translation, policy and regulation; standards setting, best practices and public perception; and public awareness on insects as feed and food; and serve as a basis for studentships, exchanges and technical field trips.

Scaling for Impact: Phase 1 of the project focused on inclusion of BSF into feed to reduce the cost of production for smallholder poultry and fish farmers by substituting the protein content of fishmeal and soya bean that constitutes 70% of production cost. Phase 2 developed new value-added products. Of note is the frass fertilizer from organic waste used as substrate to rear the insects. Frass fertiliser improves soil fertility, crop growth, yields and economic performance of maize and vegetables (e.g., tomato, French bean, and kales) when compared to existing commercial organic and chemical fertilizers. Soils treated with BSF frass fertiliser showed significantly higher nitrogen (3-fold), phosphorus, and magnesium release in the soil. It also significantly reduced soil acidity, and significantly increased phosphorus (2-fold) and magnesium (2 - 4-fold) release than soils treated with chemical fertiliser. These findings indicate that frass fertiliser can reduce the need for chemical fertiliser, improve soil health by addressing the challenges of soil acidity, phosphorus fixation and nutrient mining which is characteristic of most tropical soils. The transformation of organic waste has led to effective municipal waste management and improved environmentally sustainable agriculture practices.

Improving Animal Health: Research results show that the extraction of chitin and chitosan from BSF pupal exuviae (by-product), polysaccharides in the exoskeleton of the BSF, have an enhancing effect on the functioning of the immune system of animals. Integrating chitin/chitosan in livestock and fish diets can significantly reduce the use of antibiotics in animal production, preventing accelerated drug-resistance. Additionally, in comparison with livestock fed on conventional fishmeal feeds, (i) the blood traits of pigs and chicken fed on insect-based diets show that the body defence parameters have

--- Page 2 ---

higher values, implying better ability to withstand infection challenges; and (ii) there is a significant increased dress weight (&gt;80 kgs in 5 months), less fat and better meat quality.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

- Socio-economic and environmental implications of replacing conventional poultry feed with insect-based feed in Kenya
- Gender Specific Preference and Willingness to Pay for Meat Derived from Chicken Fed Insect-Based Feeds
- Low-cost technology for recycling agro-industrial waste into nutrient-rich organic fertilizer using black soldier fly
- Exploring Black Soldier Fly Frass as Novel Fertilizer for Improved Growth, Yield, and Nitrogen Use Efficiency of Maize Under Field Conditions
- Biochar and gypsum amendment of agro-industrial waste for enhanced black soldier fly larval biomass and quality frass fertilizer
- Effect of Dietary Replacement of Fishmeal by Insect Meal on Growth Performance, Blood Profiles and Economics of Growing Pigs in Kenya
- Efficiency and Improved Profitability of Insect-Based Aquafeeds for Farming Nile Tilapia Fish
- Cost-Effectiveness of Black Soldier Fly Larvae Meal as Substitute of Fishmeal in Diets for Layer Chicks and Growers
- In situ nitrogen mineralization and nutrient release by soil amended with black soldier fly frass fertilizer
- Antimicrobial Activity of Chemically and Biologically Treated Chitosan Prepared from Black Soldier Fly (Hermetia illucens) Pupal Shell Waste
- Black Soldier Fly-Composted Organic Fertilizer Enhances Growth, Yield, and Nutrient Quality of Three Key Vegetable Crops in Sub-Saharan Africa

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

--- Page 3 ---

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Poultry, fish and pig production in Sub-Saharan Africa is experiencing constrained access to protein in feed. Fishmeal and soya bean, the protein sources most used in feed are scarce owing to over competition with human food, and their cost, which constitutes 60-70% of the production cost, has doubled further undermining the production of livestock in the region, making it prohibitive to smallholder farmers. Thus, BSF farming addresses the gap for smallholder farmers between the supply of protein and the demand of the market in a cost effective and sustainable way. BFS smallholder farmers would earn better livelihoods from livestock production with minimal land or start-up capital which favours women and youth. Furthermore, the replacement of 5-50% of fishmeal with insect meal in the poultry sector in Kenya would increase the availability of fish and maize that can feed between 0.47-4.8 million people at the current per capita of fish and maize consumption.

There were 3 key scientific findings from the project:

1. Insects for food and feed - Insects are good sources of nutrients, especially protein. BSF when reared on over nineteen organic waste categories had high crude protein (33% - 62%), fats (25 - 49%), minerals and vitamins that are comparable to that of fishmeal or superior to that of most plant sources, offering an excellent alternative to fishmeal and soya bean. The project developed efficient processing techniques of the larvae through steaming at 84°C for 5 min and then drying at 120°C for 2h:30 to completely inactivate all bacteria and fungi of any clinical pathological effects or risk to the animal but retain the nutrients. over 53 feed formulations have been made and tested on-farm and on-station in partnership with the local government authorities. The project also tested crickets as an alternative source of protein, minerals, and vitamins for food and showed that the crude protein contents of S. icipe and G. bimaculatus were similar (56.8 and 56.9%, respectively) but comparable to those of animal protein sources. With balanced amino acid profiles superior to that of animal and plant sources and adequately rich in nutrients, these insects can contribute to the daily required nutrient intake for improved human and animal nutrition. The integration of cricket flours into ready-to-use food and feed products would especially help to address nutritional challenges of protein, iron, zinc, folate, and vitamin A deficiencies. Their high zinc, folate and potassium may also render them suitable for people at risk of hypertension, a component of the metabolic syndrome.

2. Value added products - Three new value-added products were developed. First, frass fertilizer to improve soil fertility, crop growth, yields and economic performance of stable maize and vegetables (Tomato, French bean, and Kales). Maize grown on plots treated with frass fertilizer would give 29-44% increase in the net income of farmers compared to when commercial organic fertilizer is used. The direct use of frass fertilizer by insect farmers for maize production would generate 30-232% higher net income than farmers purchasing frass fertilizer for maize production. Second, the project extracted polysaccharides chitin and chitosan found in the exoskeleton of BSF. The inclusion of Black Soldier Fly Larvae Meal (BSFLM) in broiler chicken diets significantly influenced the sensory and physicochemical properties of the meat, which accounted for the difference in organoleptic perception towards broiler meat. On-farm experiments set up revealed that the gut of broilers and layers fed diet with BSFLM (50 and 75% inclusion levels) significantly improved their gut health, which is attributed to the presence of pre-biotic and probiotic bacteria (Dysgonomonas, Morganella, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, Actinomyces, and Providencia). Integrating the BSFLM and the derivative polysaccharides in livestock and fish diets could reduce, drastically, the use of antibiotics in animal production thereby leading to

--- Page 4 ---

reduced drug-resistance and enhanced food safety for both humans and livestock. Third, the project also tested insect oils, rich in three fatty acids - (Saturated fatty acids, Monounsaturated fatty acids and Polyunsaturated fatty acid) and Omega-3 fatty acids [Alpha-linolenic acid (ALA), eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA)] and which are also very rich in vitamin A and E. These oils can be incredibly important for feedstock for biodiesel production or additives in soap and cosmetic production, adjuvants, lubricants, and surfactants.

3) Three feed standards developed: Development of standards allow the products of research to be commercialised and used by smallholder farmers. Kenya Standard KS 2921:2020 provides the requirements guiding the farmers on the rearing of insects including the conditions that will ensure safety of the harvested produce. It also provides the necessary minimum infrastructural and environmental requirements necessary for optimal production of edible insects. KS 2922 Part 1 provides for requirements of processed edible insects' products packaged and presented either as whole or ground form. KS 2922 Part 2 applies to products such as biscuits or cookies (or any other product) where edible insects are used as ingredients. These standards, being the first to be published as National Standards in the world, are expected to support the ongoing innovation especially in manufacturing while giving competitive advantage to Kenya's products as the global demand for edible insects grows.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

1. Knowledge and innovation for large scale positive change

The project delivered new knowledge and demonstrated (i) BSF as a better and cost-effective source of protein and minerals for livestock and humans, (ii) BSF substrate is an important organic fertilizer that significantly improves soil health, (iii) insect-based feed is important in improving animal health by increasing immunity and reducing resistance to drugs, iv) the Private sector is an important partner in achieving scale through development of the industry, and v) business models with low cost technologies can ease entry for women and youth into the insect feed value chain and become major producers. This shows the potential of the insects to transform the animal feeds market to the advantage of smallholder farmers.

2. Building leaders of today and tomorrow

The project supported a total of 1 PhD student (male), 20 MSc (11 females + 9 males) and 5 BSc students (3 females and 2 males) who successfully completed their research work and submitted at least 1 manuscript each for publication to internationally peer reviewed journals, which is a prerequisite

--- Page 5 ---

for submission of their theses to the graduate board at the various universities for defence and graduation. Additionally, the project has supported the development of 103 enterprises and entrepreneurs to develop the insect feed sector to reduce the cost of feed, improve the nutrition of livestock and increase productivity for the smallholder farmer that allows them to have more income and improve their livelihoods.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: Click here to enter text.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

--- Page 6 ---

Whereas the insects in this research (BSF and crickets) do not pose any environmental concern or any to human and animal health, there lies within the value chain the probability of risk of pathogenic transmission. Food safety is a key concern and value-added products are being developed for human and animal consumption. The safety analysis of the BSF larvae raised on varied waste showed economically important pathogenic bacteria (Campylobacter, Wohlfahrtiimonas etc) and opportunistic fungus (Cyberlindnera sp. and Trichosporon sp.) that might pose health risks to both animals and humans. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of bacterial and fungal communities of BSF gut across untreated substrates and highlights conserved members, potential pathogens, and their interactions. This information contributes to the establishment of safety measures for future processing of BSF larval meals and the creation of legislation to regulate their use in animal feeds and minimize risk of pathogen contamination along the insect-based feed value chain.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

This is an excellent PCR that summarizes the lessons and success of one of the most interesting projects in the CULTIAF portfolio. The project in its different phases has been able to include and implement, policy change, gender equality approaches, farmers participation, livelihoods improvement, scaling up strategies, and technological innovations that respond to a more resilient and sustainable way to produce animal-based protein. It is also remarkable the number of scientific publications this project has generated.

I want to congratulate the IDRC team for the support provided to the grantee to ensure not only the success of the initiative but also its alignment to IDRC's vision.

I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

--- Page 7 ---

.
