--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

## Enabling Business to Advance Nutrition Index (EBANI)

The project developed the Enabling Business to Advance Nutrition Index (EBANI) which measures the policy and legislative environment across 30 countries to signal policy changes which governments can implement to encourage businesses to do more for nutrition. EBANI was launched in 2022 and, has been incorporated into the global SUN (Scaling Up Nutrition) Business Network's results framework to measure success of the network over time and to advocate for policy changes which can encourage businesses to contribute more to nutrition.

The Food Systems Dashboard brings together data from 30 sources across 200+ indicators to enable users to understand their food systems, identify challenges and recommendations for actions and policies to improve diets and nutrition. The Dashboard was a key resource used throughout the 2021 UN Food Systems Summit and the Food System Dialogues. The Dashboard is based on an adaptation of the food systems framework the 2017 High Level Panel of Experts report on nutrition and food systems.

Supply Chain Assessment for Nutrition (SCAN) was developed as a methodology for rapid supply chain assessment. This is an open access tool to help identify barriers in value chains which prevent healthy diets.

The Nutrition Connect platform is an online knowledge hub focused on public-private engagement in nutritio. It has gained significant traction in the nutrition community since its launch in 2019, with topical and steadily growing resources, views, downloads and social media following. The site was developed and launched from scratch, averaging over 1,000 users per week. Followers on social media have also grown steadily over Nutrition Connect's lifetime, with nearly 2,800 by June 2022.

Nutrition Business Monitor (NBM), an open access toolkit that SMEs can use to identify areas in which they can enhance their business and their impact on nutrition. The participatory design process for NBM was based on a sample of 46 SMEs in Nigeria and Bangladesh.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

## Research outputs and publications:

Business Accountability for Better Nutrition – The report provides a series of recommendations focused on increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of business accountability mechanisms in nutrition which has been disseminated and discussed with key stakeholders. The global accountability report has

--- Page 1 ---

received some traction, and while it is anticipated to take some time to affect change in this arena, the World Benchmarking Alliance (WBA) has incorporated recommended changes into their Food and Agriculture Benchmark which assessed 350 businesses at the end of 2021.

Nutritious Food Foresight: twelve ways to invest in good food for emerging markets (2019)

Project DISRUPT - Game-changing innovations for healthy diets on a healthy planet (Working Paper Series 15, 2020)

Djeinam Toure, Anna Herforth, Gretel H Pelto, Lynnette M Neufeld, Mduduzi N N Mbuya, An Emergent Framework of the Market Food Environment in Low- and Middle-Income Countries, Current Developments in Nutrition, Volume 5, Issue 4, April 2021, nzab023, https://doi.org/10.1093/cdn/nzab023

The opportunities and the reasons for better SMEs inclusion in this landscape in a document entitled: "Increasing small and medium enterprises reporting on nutrition in low- and middle-income countries."

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Not applicable

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The project funded as part of contribution to a multi-donor collaboration for improving markets for nutrition and diet quality in developing countries. The project tested partnerships with private sector players, particularly small and medium enterprises, to increase the supply and consumption of healthy diets.

GAIN has considerable influence in the global conversation on food systems transformation. International donors (including those funding the Making Markets Work (MMW) program). Many stakeholders perceive GAIN as a leading voice in this space, and many MMW outputs are aligned with global fora, like the UNFSS.

As a result of the project, many MMW outputs were adjusted to be better fit-for-purpose over time. In an external evaluation, internal stakeholders spoke about the flexibility of the programme as a strength, often in the context of course corrections related to target or intended users. This may suggest that some outputs were solutions in search of a problem, rather than tools designed in direct response to problems articulated as part of a user-centric design process.

Findings from the independent review noted that stakeholders reported the outputs to be useful at identifying information gaps.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

--- Page 2 ---

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

An independent evaluation found that MMW's six individual workstreams are on-track to deliver their intended outcomes. Over the course of the programme some outputs have shifted format or intended audience, but nonetheless contribute to the intended outcome of the workstream

While it is not clear that this broad collection of food system actors targeted by GAIN share the same information needs, many of the programme's outputs are ultimately finding an audience. However, audiences have shifted in some instances. A positive example of this is the Enabling Businesses to Advance Nutrition Index (EBANI), whose targeted user shifted from businesses to the national Scaling Up Nutrition Business Network (SBN) coordinators who are better positioned to use the tool for advocacy. In other cases, the shift may have been less intentional.

The food systems dashboard was not in the original design of MMW in the proposal sent to donors in 2017. Following the receipt of feedback from a variety of, but particularly country-based stakeholders, it became clear that, while the global Food Systems Dashboard has a significant value in itself to inform policymakers' decisions in-country, country stakeholders need data – and a Dashboard – at national level. GAIN has taken this feedback on board and will be making adjustment with future funding.

Many outputs focus on SMEs, specifically SBN businesses, whose priorities MMW is well-aligned to. However medium and large-scale businesses are also intended audiences for discrete outputs of the programme, including work on global accountability mechanisms and knowledge and evidence. These businesses did not identify evidence or accountability as key needs but expressed a greater need for trust between actors and an understanding of how to improve nutritional value of specific products.

The work done by GAIN did limited work to address gender specifically, as this remained a weak spot of GAIN's work.

In response to the pandemic, GAIN responded quickly to ensure it could still meet its objectives given the shift in the working environment. The project team also adjusted its workplan to add work on the impact of the pandemic of global food systems. In 2020, Nutrition Connect created a dedicated COVID-19 information page. The most significant part of this page was a blog series focused on the impact of COVID-19 on food systems and nutrition, co-curated by Lawrence Haddad, Jessica Fanzo and Corinna Hawkes.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project was developed and implemented as part of the IDRC's 2015-2020 strategic plan. It contributed to the strategic objective of:

Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change:

--- Page 3 ---

Knowledge generated from the project has potential for large scale positive change because the MMW programme was positioned as a learning opportunity for the development community on what works when engaging the public and private sector on nutrition. For example, the Food Systems Dashboard has been feeding into the United Nations Food Systems Summit (UNFSS).

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

### General Objective:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

### Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

### Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

### Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

### Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

IDRC provided funding as part of a multi-donor pool of funds. This makes it hard to determine which outputs and deliverables can be attributed to the Centre funds since the reports submitted were for the overall initiative.

The project met its objectives despite delays due to the coronavirus pandemic and delays resulting from course correction. The flexibility and adaptability to shift in response to new information is a strength of MMW workstreams, as assessed by the project officers and also referenced in the external evaluation.

## Strategic Considerations

--- Page 4 ---

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Overall, the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the project approval document have been effective to some extent. IDRC POs and Program Director actively participated in two virtual review sessions where there was an opportunity to engage with other donor representatives supporting the M4N initiative and understand their areas of interest.

Due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, options to have direct face-to-face interactions with donor counterparts as well as learning and networking with other projects could not materialize as planned. A risk identified in the project approval document was

that IDRC programs will not succeed in leveraging the benefits of the larger M4N initiative. Results from the GAIN investment were not as innovative as other opportunities and the Centre did not gain from the learning and networks anticipated from the project. Similarly, the MMW forum was not as effective a platform for IDRC to engage with key donors as were other venues such as AGRF or partnership with ACIAR and SDC.

While this program is large and complex, with several objectives, GAIN did successfully implement the project and meet its objectives.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

GAIN personnel, particularly under the leadership for Dr. Haddad and Dr. Neufeld, are well versed in ethical review procedures and where appropriate followed the required procedure.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

GAIN remains a competent and experience institution working on combatting malnutrition in all its forms and strengthening food systems globally. However, IDRC collaboration with GAIN should be structured to maximise value to IDRC's visibility as a thought leader in research to support transformation in food systems. This may mean supporting collaborations in specific country contexts (for instance potential programming where IDRC supported research teams in the CCHeFS partnership with Rockefeller include collaboration with the relevant GAIN country office) rather than funding global GAIN programs where IDRC's contribution does not stand out.

--- Page 5 ---

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
