--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Helped to generate the strongest assessment of African climate evidence ever contained in an IPCC report. The impact of the project on the IPCC Assessment Report is captured on our website. Deborah Roberts, the IPCC co-chair, stated the following when asked about the impact of IDRC support through this specific project: "The Africa regional chapter presents the clearest and most comprehensive review of the continent ever contained in an IPCC report. The new level of synthetic assessment undertaken by the Africa team highlights a diverse range of climate change issues significant to Africa, and has also advanced the understanding of climate change risk across the entire report."

Strong influence on the African Union Climate Change and Resilient Development Strategy and Action Plan, 2022-2032: Based on synthesis done in this project, and policy outreach after publication of the IPCC report, project team members were invited to write the sections on Climate Change Literacy and Strategy on Finance and Resource Mobilization. Collectively, the Africa chapter of the IPCC had a very significant impact on the AU Strategy, and in many cases the messaging is highly consistent between the IPCC Africa chapter Key Messages and the AU Strategy on the themes of climate change literacy, adaptation finance, good governance and law, transport and mobility, urban resilience, climate insurance and climate services.

Ground-breaking work on understanding Complex Climate Change Risks and influenced the entire IPCC report: Dr Trisos, Dr Simpson, and Dr Totin (all African researchers) led a cross-IPCC project synthesizing concepts of climate change risk to update the IPCC climate change risk framework to better understand how risks compound and cascade across multiple sectors (Simpson et al 2021). This work influenced the approach to risk in the entire IPCC report, for beyond the Africa Chapter, and it has also influenced policy in unexpected places:

In Belgium: The new risk framework has been used by the Chief of Staff for the Federal minister for Climate, Environment, Sustainable Development and Green Deal in the Belgian government to help inform the establishment of a coordinating body for the risk analysis and assessment of the climate crisis. The body will report to the Belgian National Security Council, and the aim is to enable Belgium to have an appropriate and up-to-date climate change risk analysis.

In the USA: The United States Department of Energy has also set their 2030 Vision for risk assessment based in part on the updated Complex Climate Change Risk Framework from Simpson et al. 2021, see https://multisectordynamics.org/vision/

Why does this matter? African research is not only for Africa, this an example of African thought leadership influencing the developed world.

Influencing the Africa Climate Mobility Initiative: Based on his work in the IPCC Africa Chapter, Dr Simpson (one of the Chapter Scientists employed through this project) has been recruited by the UN Africa Climate Mobility Initiative (ACMI) to be the Lead Author of the forthcoming Africa Climate Mobility Initiative Report, 'Shaping the Future of Mobility in Africa: Addressing Climate-Forced Displacement &amp; Migration'. This ACMI Report was released at COP27. From 1 October 2022, Dr Simpson began working full time with the UN to establish a new African centre (and research nodes across Africa) for climate mobility.

--- Page 1 ---

South African Presidential Climate Change Commission: IPCC Africa Chapter Authors and Prof. Mark New presented key messages from their IPCC work to the South African Presidential Climate Change Commission (SAPCCC) in March 2022. Based on this work, further advice was sought by the SAPCCC regarding pathways for climate-resilient development in South Africa. The team drew heavily on the material in Chapter 9 (Africa) and Chapter 18 (Climate Resilient Development Pathways) to provide a non-technical summary of climate-resilient development and its implications for South Africa's just climate transition. The results of the work were also presented to the wider South African public in a SAPCC Dialogue on Climate Resilient Development Pathways on 15 August 2022.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Trisos, C.H., I.O. Adelekan, E. Totin, A. Ayanlade, J. Efitre, A. Gemeda, K. Kalaba, C. Lennard, C. Masao, Y. Mgaya, G. Ngaruiya, D. Olago, N.P. Simpson, and S. Zakieldeen, 2022: Africa. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1285-1455, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.011. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter09.pdf

New, M., D. Reckien, D. Viner, C. Adler, S.-M. Cheong, C. Conde, A. Constable, E. Coughlan de Perez, A. Lammel, R. Mechler, B. Orlove, and W. Solecki, 2022: Decision Making Options for Managing Risk. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2539-2654, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.026. https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg2/downloads/report/IPCC_AR6_WGII_Chapter17.pdf

Simpson, N.P., Andrews, T.M., Krönke, M. et al. Climate change literacy in Africa. Nature Climate Change. 11, 937-944 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-021-01171-x

Simpson, N.P., Mach, K.J., Constable, A., Hess, J., Hogarth, R., Howden, M., Lawrence, J., Lempert, R.J., Muccione, V., Mackey, B. and New, M.G., 2021. A framework for complex climate change risk assessment. One Earth, 4(4), pp.489-501. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2590332221001792

Vousdoukas, M.I., Clarke, J., Ranasinghe, R. et al. African heritage sites threatened as sea-level rise accelerates. Nature Climate Change. 12, 256-262 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-022-01280-1

--- Page 2 ---

Regional fact sheets on IPCC results and implications for Southern, Central, West, East and North Africa: http://cdkn.org/ar6-southernafrica (English and Portuguese); http://cdkn.org/ar6-centralafrica (English and French); http://cdkn.org/ar6-westafrica (French and English); http://cdkn.org/ar6-eastafrica (English); http://cdkn.org/ar6-northafrica (English)

Zvobgo, L., Johnston, P., Williams, P.A. et al. The role of indigenous knowledge and local knowledge in water sector adaptation to climate change in Africa: a structured assessment. Sustain Sci 17, 2077–2092 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-022-01118-x

Leal Filho, W., Totin, E., Franke, J.A., Andrew, S.M., Abubakar, I.R., Azadi, H., Nunn, P.D., Ouweneel, B., Williams, P.A., Simpson, N.P. and Team, T.G.A.M.I., 2022. Understanding responses to climate-related water scarcity in Africa. Science of the Total Environment, 806, p.150420.

Stringer, L.C., Simpson, N.P., Schipper, E.L.F. et al. Climate Resilient Development Pathways in Global Drylands. Anthr. Sci. 1, 311–319 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s44177-022-00027-z

Torhan, S., Grady, C.A., Ajibade, I., Galappaththi, E.K., Hernandez, R.R., Musah■Surugu, J.I., Nunbogu, A.M., Segnon, A.C., Shang, Y., Ulibarri, N. and Campbell, D., 2022. Tradeoffs and Synergies Across Global Climate Change Adaptations in the Food■Energy■Water Nexus. Earth's Future, 10(4), p.e2021EF002201. https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1029/2021EF002201

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The most important result was the successful completion of the 'Africa Chapter' (Ch.09) and 'Decision-making Options for Managing Risk' (Ch. 17) of the IPCC Working Group II Contribution to the 6th Assessment Report. The high level of data and knowledge integration in the Africa chapter elevated the chapter into a position of thought leadership in the IPCC Working Group II Summary for Policymakers, with Africa Chapter authors leading sections of the Summary for Policymakers on climate finance, complex climate change risk, solar geoengineering, climate change literacy, and observed climate change impacts.

Another important output was a series of short fact sheets communicating the IPCC key findings for specific sub-regions of Africa (South, Central, West, East, and North). These fact sheets were developed in collaboration with CDKN, are available in English, French, and Portuguese, and have been shared in multiple science-policy forums. At COP27 in Egypt in 2022, these fact sheets were in daily use by the African Group of Negotiators and their usefulness resulted in the Gates foundation offering further funding from this project group to offer direct support to the African Group of Negotiators in future years.

Multiple path-breaking research publications were produced as part of the project, and are listed in the project outputs above. A few highlights were the first Africa-wide assessment of the feasibility and

--- Page 3 ---

effectiveness of climate change adaptation actions. This paper won an award from the journal Environmental Research Letters. Another success was the first Africa-wide assessment of climate change literacy rates (that is, the proportion of a country's population that have both heard of climate change and think it is caused by human activity), this work highlighted the issue of lower climate change literacy rates among woman than men and how increased secondary and tertiary education can help address this gap, identifying a large potential co-benefit between development goals focused on education and those targeting climate change actions.

Another influential result was a continent-wide assessment of climate change research funding since 1990, showing that less than 4% of global climate change research funding has focused on Africa, and only around 1% of funding has actually gone directly to African scholars. Most funding for climate change research on Africa goes to institutions in the EU, UK and USA. This result generated a lot of media attention and was featured in calls for a more decolonial approach to climate change research.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The intended result of the project was to increase the uptake of Africa-focused climate change impacts and adaptation research within the IPCC Working Group II Report. The project has been very successful in achieving this result. The high level of data and knowledge integration on climate change impacts and adaptation in the Africa chapter elevated the chapter into a position of thought leadership across the IPCC Working Group II Report, including the Summary for Policymakers and the Technical Summary.

Africa Chapter authors led sections of the Summary for Policymakers on climate finance, complex climate change risk, solar geoengineering, climate change literacy, climate change adaptation, and observed climate change impacts. Furthermore, due to the breadth and depth of synthesis work done in the Africa chapter, the single case study example for climate resilient development selected for the Technical Summary of the IPCC Working Group II Report is for Africa.

The project also supported three Chapter Scientists (Dr Megan Lukas Sithole, Dr Nick Simpson and Luckson Zvobgo) and six Research Assistants/Interns (Danielle Millar, Luleka Dlamini, Portia Adade Williams, Emily Nicklin, Lauren Arendse, and Birgitt Ouweneel). Of these nine beneficiaries, seven are women and all are early career researchers. All of these researchers are now highly experienced and capacitated in research synthesis, and are in a position to play leading roles in the next IPCC assessment cycle.

Some conclusions from the authors themselves are worth noting here as we consider the value for money presented in this project and future pathways for support for synthesis efforts:

"The CLARE funding has demonstrated the very large returns on investment, both in terms of world-leading research and policy influence that come from supporting synthesis research for an IPCC team from Africa. However, what this project delivered came at a large cost for the researchers who often had to crunch what would ordinarily be multiple years of synthesis work into a few months in order to deliver to the IPCC timelines so our work could be reflected in the IPCC report. Our opinion is that this model is not sustainable for the future.

--- Page 4 ---

It would be transformational if support for synthesis research could be broadened to have a more permanent synthesis research program so that developing country authors are not again left playing catch-up with developed country colleagues when the next round of IPCC begins. For example, funding support starting in 2023 for synthesis research projects focused on climate action in African cities and on climate change and heritage would have a high likelihood of those research projects having a substantial influence on IPCC assessment reports and related policy processes at early stages of the next IPCC assessment cycle."

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

The results of this project, however, are highly relevant to Strategy 2030. The project produced very high quality research in developing countries and actively shared this knowledge for widespread impact. The project provides a case study in value for money investments to mobilise knowledge through synthesis efforts in response to a clear opportunity for policy impact and capacity strengthening.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: Click here to enter text.

4 Fully met X 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met X 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met X 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met X 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

--- Page 5 ---

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

This research project was considered low risk. The project was co-lead by a well-known and high performing principle investigator, who also led one of the four consortia supported under CARIAA (the ASSAR project, 107640), in addition to the previous phase of this project (109127). The activities envisioned in this project were also considered straight forward, involving hiring staff, procuring consultants and mentoring interns. To ameliorate risk of activities not being performed however, the responsible officer interacted regularly with the project lead to ensure that the results envisioned were achieved. This proved to be an effective approach.

Despite being considered low risk at the outset, the project was implemented through the COVID 19 pandemic, resulting in the need for a no-cost extension of 7 months. Budget savings were generated as a result of the need to cancel face-to-face workshops. The project team identified a concrete synthesis need and re-allocated underspent funds to support two Chapter Scientists to meet this need through these savings. Specifically, in order to support the IPCC summary products, and also provide the content for Africa-specific outreach activities of their IPCC work, they used the savings to conduct a synthesis of content on Africa across the IPCC AR6 reports (see IPCC Fact Sheets for Africa in the outputs section). Risk mitigation strategies are therefore considered successful.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program

--- Page 6 ---

Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
