--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

## Generated new knowledge on agri-food and health policy coherence

The project sought to determine the coherence (or lack thereof) between agri-food policies and health policies aimed at addressing diet-related noncommunicable diseases in South Africa. The project analysed over 60 agri-food and health policies and found that there was lack of coherence across these policies. The study found that the agricultural, trade, health and other related policies do not adequately speak to each other, and that there was inadequate multisectoral coordination.

## Research capacity strengthening:

To the best of our knowledge, this project is a pioneering effort in Africa to employ both quantitative and qualitative approaches to investigate the level and causes of incoherence between health and agri-food policies. During the appraisal of the project, it was recognized that while the principal investigator had impressive qualifications, she would require support in certain areas of the research where she lacked expertise, such as value chain analysis. She successfully assembled a team that included mid- and early-career researchers, which allowed her to achieve the project's goals while also improving their collective research skills.

## Gender implications:

One of the specific objectives of this project was to establish the knowledge, attitudes, barriers and enablers to fruit and vegetable consumption among different socio-economic groups and genders in South Africa. The quantitative research findings showed that there were no significant differences between female and male headed households in both the frequency of, and the likelihood of consuming the minimum recommended levels of fruits and vegetables. The qualitative study, however, revealed that although both genders viewed fruits and vegetables as nutritious food items equally, women were commonly believed to consume more fruits and vegetables than men, as they placed greater importance on their health benefits. This was partially attributed to the fact that the majority of the study participants obtained health information from local healthcare facilities, which men typically have less interaction with, leading to less exposure to reliable information about the health benefits of fruits and vegetables.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Sinyolo, S.; Murendo, C.; Nyamwanza, A.M.; Sinyolo, S.A.; Ndinda, C.; Nwosu, C.O. Farm Production Diversification and Dietary Diversity among Subsistence Farming Households: Panel Data Evidence

--- Page 1 ---

from South Africa. Sustainability 2021, 13, 10325. https://doi.org/10.3390/su131810325

Sinyolo S, Ndinda C, Murendo C, Sinyolo SA, &amp; Neluheni M. (2020). Access to information technologies and consumption of fruits and vegetables in South Africa: Evidence from nationally representative data. [Published] International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17(13): 4880. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17134880

Neluheni, M., Sinyolo, S. &amp; Ndinda, C. (2021) Sharing information through television and mobile devices can help improve the consumption of fruit and vegetables. HSRC Review. 19(1):38-39. https://repository.hsrc.ac.za/handle/20.500.11910/15986

Ndinda C. Preventing non-communicable diseases: The importance of agro-food policies. HSRC Review | Volume 17 Number 2 • June 2019 pp10-11.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

There are low levels of fruit and vegetable consumption in South Africa

The research found that while South Africa produces an abundance of fruits and vegetables, their consumption levels are low, especially in townships and low-income households. Only about a fifth of the population consumed the recommended five or more servings of fruits and vegetables daily in 2018, as recommended by the World Health Organization. This low consumption is largely due to cost, with many households unable to afford fresh produce, which is often more expensive than staple foods. Additionally, indigenous fruits and vegetables, which are nutrient-rich and cheaper, are underutilized and neglected due to negative attitudes. These fruits and vegetables are mainly sold by informal traders and are not well represented in formal food chains, reinforcing their image as "poor people's food". The shift towards modern diets, even in rural areas, has further contributed to the neglect of indigenous fruits and vegetables.

Additionally, the results indicated that socio-demographic factors such as being black or colored, being part of a larger household, and living in urban areas was correlated with insufficient fruit and vegetable intake. Meanwhile, adequate consumption was associated with higher income, wealth status, and vehicle ownership. The study suggests that efforts to increase fruit and vegetable consumption should be tailored to the different socio-economic profiles of the population.

There are insufficient incentives to produce and market fruits and vegetables

The value-chain analysis showed that there were insufficient incentives for the production, distribution, marketing, and consumption of indigenous fruits and vegetables. Specifically, smallholder farmers were found to often lack the necessary inputs and innovative technology to produce quality fruits and vegetables, and this tends to exclude them from formal markets. In contrast, commercial farmers

--- Page 2 ---

produce mostly for export markets, which pay higher prices and limit access to local markets for low-income households.

## Agri-food policies are incoherent due to lack of coordination

This study reviewed a total of 63 policies in South Africa, including health, food, and agricultural policies, but most were not specifically targeted towards fruit and vegetables and instead focused on food production or consumption in general. These policies were formulated at the national level but implemented at the local level. The study found that the policies were not coherent, lacking inter-sectoral and inter-departmental coordination, even in policies aimed at addressing food security, which primarily focused on supply and access rather than utilization and nutrition. Additionally, there was a disconnect between policy intent and implementation, with the main challenge being the lack of coordination across various sectors and governance structures.

## Key recommendations

To effectively address the incoherence in agri-food policies, the research team recommends that to improve coordination, a multi-stakeholder approach is needed, involving government, civil society, and other key actors. These stakeholders need to have a paradigm shift that places the health and wellbeing of the South African people above commercial interests. More specifically, policy incentives should be introduced with the aim of improving the availability and affordability of fruits and vegetables across food chains. These policies might include tax incentives or subsidies aimed at improving the market competitiveness of fruits and vegetables.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change:

To the best of our knowledge, this project is the first of its kind in Africa to demonstrate the lack of coherence between agri-food and health policies in the context of preventing and controlling diet-related noncommunicable diseases. The findings from this study have the potential to influence policymakers in South Africa to enact cross-sectoral policy changes that will enhance access to fruits and vegetables for South Africans, especially those from low-income communities.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow:

The project afforded Dr. Catherine Ndinda, a female researcher, and her collaborators the opportunity to establish themselves as emerging voices that are using research evidence to drive changes in food systems and enable healthy and sustainable diets in Southern Africa.

--- Page 3 ---

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To generate new knowledge on the coherence (or lack thereof) of agri-food and NCD prevention policies in order to increase consumption of fruits and vegetables, and hence contribute to reducing the high burden of NCD in South Africa.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1: To identify the agriculture and food policies that affect the fruit and vegetable supply chain in South Africa, and have the potential to influence fruit and vegetable consumption;

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 4:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

As stated in the Project Approval Document, the main risk facing the project was that certain elements of the proposed research, such as the value-chain analysis component, were novel to the lead applicant. To overcome this, the lead applicant collaborated with researchers with relevant skills to

--- Page 4 ---

ensure the successful completion of the project. The project was also impacted by the Covid-19 pandemic, which resulted in severe lockdown measures in South Africa, leading to a request for and approval of a three-month no cost extension.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Director CRFS: Santiago Alba-Corral

Ag. Director GH: Montasser Kamal

Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure

CRFS Team

Global Health Team

Communications: Angela Baiya

VP PPB: Dominique Charron

VP SRP: Julie Shouldice

Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin

Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon

GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie

## Notes

--- Page 5 ---

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
