--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

(i) New evidence regarding adaptation options for vulnerable people living in two climate hotspots: haor wetlands of the northeast (Sunamganj) and coastal Sundarbans in the southwest (Satkhira). Across the two regions, the project team estimates they reached over 12,000 direct beneficiaries, including 6,750 women and 4,500 disadvantaged household heads, and more than 1,600,000 indirect beneficiaries. Baseline study, exploratory and participatory research involving 2,700 households across six villages to understand differentiated impacts and factors of vulnerability.

(ii) A national inventory on adaptation technologies in agriculture and water prepared, assessing appropriateness and effectiveness of these technologies. Community consultations identified commonly used agricultural technologies such as compost and animal manure, chemical fertilizers, multi-crops and crop rotation, integrated (paddy, fish and vegetables growing), integrated pest management (IPM), drip irrigation and treadle pump. The farmers are aware of adaptation technologies in agriculture, although the poor farmers and women cannot afford these practices. Promising technologies include salinity-tolerant and flood-resilient crop varieties; short and high yielding varieties; low-water consuming crops (like maize and sunflower in the coastal region), and vermicompost. Most of the conventional agricultural technologies are used by men, however some technologies are also used by women, including reaper and spray machines in Satkhira or solar pump and deep tube well for irrigation in Sunamganj.

(iii) Households adopt technologies demonstrated for drinking water and small agriculture in two climate hotspots:

(iv) Strengthened capacity of women and socially disadvantaged groups, with over 5,800 participants trained on adaptation technologies. Capacity of 300 women stakeholders and over 120 youths enhanced through workshops on women empowerment and gender equity. Community radio program, local cultural events and knowledge platform have influenced thousands of community people. Enhanced awareness and capacity of the stakeholders to adopt adaptation technologies; empower women, youths, and disadvantaged groups; and strengthen community resilience to climate change and disasters.

(v) Scaling-up of strategies for accelerating national and local climatic actions. Coordination with Department of Women Affairs to convene "learning hub" event on integrating gender equity into National Disaster Management Plan and Bangladesh Delta Plan 2100. Additional outreach included knowledge sharing workshop with the LDC universities; sessions during Global Gobeshona conferences; and space created within national policies and programs to accelerate transformative adaptation that empowers women and disadvantaged groups.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published

--- Page 1 ---

on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Climate Change Adaptation Knowledge and Technology (CCAT) Inventory Report

QSWE2NNTMQPJ-907143584-639773 identifies priority options based in literature review and consultations

Haque, Beiraghdar, Choudhury and Azad (2021) Climate change adaptation technologies In LMICs: Issues of equity and disaster resilience in water and agriculture sector. IC36-1643402171-286129

Literature review incorporating gender issues into climate adaptation practices. Identifies key gaps:

- slow uptake and scaling of adaptation knowledge and technology
- lack of inter-sectoral coordination and integration
- inadequate research on community participation, and gender implications of adaptation
- disparate considerations of climate change and societal issues; and
- adaptation innovations not systematically promoted to ensure sustainability

Social learning and innovation from diverse sources needed for scaling up the benefits of adaptation technologies equitably and to enhance resilience to climate change stresses and shocks.

Haque, Azad and Choudhury (2022) "Social learning, innovative adaptation and community resilience to disaster: the case of flash floods in Bangladesh" Disaster Prevention and Management. 10.1108/DPM-12-2020-0373

Study maps the processes and examine the application of social learning in formulating coping measures and adaptation strategies in Bangladesh's wetland communities. Findings include: (1) social learning and memory have often enabled wetland communities to adopt diverse coping and adaptive measures in response to flash floods; (2) social learning-based actions have resulted in reduced flood-risk and enhanced community resilience to flash floods, especially when these actions were supported by both local and external innovations and (3) the aforementioned social learning stemmed primarily from first-hand experience of flash floods, which was shared via various collective learning platforms.

Azad, Haque and Choudhury (2021) "Social learning-based disaster resilience: Collective action in flash flood-prone Sunamganj communities in Bangladesh" Environmental Hazards 10.1080/17477891.2021.1976096

Study investigates the role of local institutions in collective action in flash flood-prone Sunamganj. Results reveal that the diversity and flexibility of local-level institutions creates multiple learning platforms in which social interaction, problem formulation, nurturing diverse perspectives, and generating innovative knowledge for collective action can take place. Within these formal and informal learning arenas, communities' desire and willingness to be self-reliant and to reduce their dependency on external funding and assistance is clearly evident. Nurturing institutional diversity and flexibility at the local level is therefore recommended for transforming social learning into active problem-solving measures and to enhance community resilience to disaster shocks.

--- Page 2 ---

Nasreen, Mallick and Neelormi “Empowering Women to Enhance Social Equity and Disaster Resilience in Coastal Bangladesh through Climate Change Adaptation Knowledge and Technologies” in Nasreen, Hossain and Khan (2023) Coastal Disaster Risk Management in Bangladesh. 10.4324/9781003253495

The adoption of socially transformative adaptation technologies may support pursuing the goals of accelerating climate action and reducing gender vulnerability for the achieving social inequity and empowering women and disadvantaged, impoverished people. SAKTEE project identified, evaluated and demonstrated technologies in water and agricultural sectors for multi-level institutional adoption as well as to empower women and poverty-stricken disadvantaged groups in the project districts.

Eight Masters-level theses and one PhD thesis drawing from quantitative and qualitative data analysis, exploratory studies with feminist research and capability approach for deeper understanding of the issues:

Md. Kazi. Rokonuzzaman, Analyzing differentiated climate change impacts on women in wetlands, Patuakhali Science and Technology University

AsmaUl Husna, Understanding the differential climate change impacts among impoverished and disadvantaged households in coastal Bangladesh, Khulna University

Alvira Farheen Ria, Climate impacts, responses and adaptation technologies in small-scale agriculture in coastal Bangladesh, University of Manitoba

Dolon Champa Dutta, Climate impacts on women vulnerabilities and adaptation technologies in coastal Bangladesh, Jahangirnagar University

Abul Kalam Azad (PhD), Differentiated impacts of climate change and agricultural adaptation technologies on social equity in Bangladesh, University of Manitoba

Refat Hasan, Climate impacts on agricultural vulnerabilities and adaptation technologies in the flood prone areas of Bangladesh, Jahangirnagar University

Woakimul Islam Shakil, Gender differentiated vulnerability and adaptation of climate change, Jahangirnagar University

M. Kamruzzaman Shehab, Adaptation to water use through adoption of technology in Satkhira communities, University of Manitoba

Sabbir Ahmed Khan, Innovation and adaptation technologies in reducing climate-induced disaster impacts in Satkhira, University of Manitoba

Further two Open Access journal articles in preparation on Gender and Social Equity Analysis of Disaster and on Climate Change Differentiated Impacts.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

--- Page 3 ---

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: .

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 4:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

--- Page 4 ---

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
