--- Page 0 ---

NOTE: IDRC policy requires a completion report when the value of a project exceeds CAD 150,000, regardless of whether the focus of project is a research grant or operational costs of a partnership. Usually this duality is complementary, for example PCR for 107217 offered an opportunity to speak of the CARIAA partnership as a whole, rather than its constituent research consortia. Yet as the CDKN partnership was implemented through a single large grant, results and learning are mostly contained in completion report 108754. For this reason, this PCR focuses narrowly on this project's specific objectives and activities.

## Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

As noted at the end of PCR 108754, this partnership was a 'rescue mission' of CDKN, providing a new conduit for Dutch support after seven years of UK-DFID as the primary funder. Under Georgina's leadership, IDRC helped CDKN pivot to south-south-south leadership, involving implementing partners in Latin America and South Asia. A positive relationship was built with the Dutch Ministry of Foreign Affairs, leading to an expanded 'Step Change' partnership starting in 2022.

The partnership enabled IDRC to retain and cultivate talented personnel. Georgina Cundill Kemp and Marie-Eve Landry served as the responsible officer for CDKN over the four years. This provided each of them with opportunity to demonstrate their skills in leading ambitious programming, managing a partnership, and providing a healthy relationship with grantees. The experience gained and performance shown by each of them has served IDRC well.

The partnership also pioneered IDRC approach to knowledge sharing. As noted in the PAD and partnership authorization, in 2018 this was a unique effort, yet in hindsight became an example of a core objective under IDRC Strategy 2030. Lessons from CDKN feed into prorgam and corporate efforts, from retaining a knowledge broker within the Gender equality in Low Carbon World (GLOW) cohort of Supporting Inclusive Economies to refiling a knowledge translation and sharing framework in Policy and Evaluation.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

As this project focused on operational costs, the question is not applicable. Nonetheless, Georgina contributed to refinement of, and forthcoming publications on, knowledge brokering theory and practice that will be described under Step Change.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

--- Page 1 ---

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Not applicable.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

As noted under Q1, the partnership pioneered IDRC experience in knowledge sharing, and proved vital to sustaining the CDKN through the exit of DFID as a major funder and the disruption due to the Covid pandemic. The strong position of CDKN on the global stage, clearly shown by its prominence in United Nations climate conferences COP26 and 27, is an important catalyst for research to contribute to climate action.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

Donor involvement The project approval document (PAD) describes a Governance Committee in which IDRC and DGIS senior officials would periodically meet to discuss progress and guide future work. IDRC anticipated that DGIS would be an equal partner, closely following implementation and providing multiple points of contact that serve as counterparts to our PO and Program Director. In practice, contact with DGIS was concentrated in a single point of contact who was constrained in the amount of time they had to dedicate to the partnership, and who focused more on formal approval of written plans reports. In hindsight, rather than prescribe a governance committee, the PAD could have encouraged IDRC to refine ways of working tailored to the amount of time and depth of engagement of the partner. In general, it is useful to specific how our partner views their investment in the collaboration (how it is situated within their larger portfolio) and what level of involvement the partner expects to have in implementation.

Supporting responsible PO Another lesson concerns how to embed partnerships within IDRC programming and provide them with required support. Restructuring of IDRC programs in 2020 altered the context around this partnership, heightening the need for the senior program officer to lead independently of a Program Leader or Director. In hindsight, the PAD description of a single senior program officer as the sole staffing left understated the demand for operational support recently provided by program assistant or program management officer. The SPO needed to be largely self-sufficient, convening colleagues from the program team when needed. Ultimately this worked, yet future PADs could be more explicit on how such partnerships will be adequately supported.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

--- Page 2 ---

Provide specific numbers where possible.

This aspect of the partnership is already elaborated in PCR 108754.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

As described in PCR 108754, the partnership confronted both disruption due to Covid pandemic and gains in foreign exchange as ZAR depreciated compared to CAD. The mutually agreed and carefully managed no-cost extension successfully navigated both challenges resulting in an effective use of the resources available. Having a single Grant Officer for all aspects of the partnership also facilitated the ability of IDRC to provide a clear overview of finances.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

The PAD focused exclusively on the initial near-term risks of timely staff recruitment and the need for rapid grant approval and commitment. Risk mitigation was more comprehensively tracked and managed within project 108754 as well as the annual workplan and reports prepared by IDRC during implementation. An implicit risk that was not addressed is the potential for EFP staff to leave during the final year or months of a partnership. This risk did not materialize in this case yet remains as personnel will naturally consider future employment prospects and may leave the burden of closure and completion work to colleagues.

--- Page 3 ---

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

This aspect is covered under PCR 108754.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning
