--- Page 0 ---

* Note: IDRC and Columbia University agreed in the Grant Agreement that the two titles, one proposed by IDRC and the the by the recipient, referred to the same project.

**Note: Original closure date of July 2022 was extended by 3 months due to delays mostly caused by the COVID-19 pandemics. This also enabled component 002 funded in the framework of the IDRC Corporate response to COVID-19 and in particular via the AFS rapid response covid initiative, Stream 1 project cohort.

## Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Relevant results are listed and discussed below in Section 2 on Outputs and Section 4 on Outcomes, and we will not repeat them here. Here their usefulness and innovativeness dimensions are summarized:

- Use of the Impact Explorer tool to discuss different scenarios and foresight exercise to inform the implementation of NAPs (National Adaptation Plans to the UNFCCC) in Ghana, Senegal and Zimbabwe;
- Invitation to AgMIP Adaptation-Teams to prepare larger proposals to the Green Climate Fund (GCF);
- More clarity in understanding trade-offs between scenarios on agricultural development and poverty reduction: the link between different choices to invest in specific crops and livestock types/size/geographical distribution of investment was clarified, and increased the robustness of the rationale for the support of a transition towards agroecology in West Africa. Some myths on ways to reduce GHGs emissions via cattle reduction and more investments in goats – more resilient to arid climates – were also debunked quite robustly by the research results.

The very sophisticated and detailed modeling and scenarios building efforts led by AgMIP, and in particular the Regional Integrated Assessments and the Representative Agricultural Pathways building exercises, are innovative because they are co-produced with national stakeholders (see list of main ones in the outputs section) who also contributed to their usability and portability. The other innovative aspects of the results is that the models are now adapted to a broader variety of agroecological zones and they can be used at the national scale, not only at the regional or at the very local one. They therefore fill a “missing middle” gap in modeling. This is an important step ahead to ensure that these models are used in the design, funding and implementation of agricultural development plans compatible with and hopefully more visionary than NAPs.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project’s completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

--- Page 1 ---

The project was very outputs oriented and it produced more that 35 published outputs, out of which ~15 peer reviewed articles. Among them, AgMIP published one book titled “Handbook of Climate Change and Agroecosystem: Climate Change and Farming System Planning in Africa and South Asia: AgMIP Stakeholder–driven Research”. Eds Rosenzweig, C.; Mutter C.Z.; Contreras, E.M.1-29 - Most of the Africa Chapters (5) of the Handbook came from this project. Some important examples:

Potential Impacts of Agricultural Intensification and Climate Change on the Livelihoods of Farmers in Nyoro, Senegal, West Africa - https://doi.org/10.1142/9781786348791_0001

Representative Agricultural Pathways: A Multi-Scale Foresight Process to Support Transformation of Farming Systems - https://doi.org/10.1142/9781786348791_0003

Beyond written publications, the main outputs were the adaptation to the three national contexts of the decision support tool “Impact Explorer” (IE), and the agricultural impact assessment conducted via the use of the tool. It is also worth mentioning that the project contributed to refine many of the standard modelling tools used by the international research community such as DSSAT, InfoCrop and CropMaker; although it is hard to quantify how much of this grant contributed to a larger endeavour.

The project also contributed to major flagship reports lead by other organizations, for example a study coordinated by CIRAD and published in Global Change Biology which assesses the impact of temperature rise on maize yields in sub-Saharan Africa. It reveals that an increase of 4°C by 2081-2100 could result in a decrease in yields of 14 to 26%. Data from Ghana, Senegal and Zimbabwe come from this grant.

It is important to mention that AgMIP continues to be an active collaboration, and that the end of the grant agreement with IDRC, CLARE1 related outputs keep coming out on the main AgMIP website (https://agmip.org/), for example this one on Developing Pathways for Sustainable Agricultural Development in Zimbabwe by 2030.

Other outputs – More than one output was produced under each of these categories. A relevant example is listed here:

Learning pieces on the impacts of COVID on food systems in Zimbabwe, which also contributed to IDRC’s synthesis work on food systems and COVID. For Example.: https://agmip.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/AgMIP-ICRISAT-COVID-blog-20211209.pdf

Peer reviewed articles on modelling – Ex.: Climate Change Impact and Variability on Cereal Productivity among Smallholder Farmers under Future Production Systems in West Africa. Sustainability, 13, 5191. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13095191

Peer reviewed articles on Open Access Datasets: Ex: AgMIP Regional Integrated Assessment of Agricultural Systems in Nioro, Senegal: Representative Agricultural Pathways, Climate, Crop and Economic Datasets - Open Data Journal for Agricultural Research, vol. 7, p. 27-38

Book Chapter on agroecological practices with other IDRC strategic partners – Ex.: Strengthening research-policy links for food system transformation in Zimbabwe - Dossiers d’Agropolis International https://www.agropolis.org/publications/agroecology.php

Co-produced blog informing the emergency and relief community. Ex.: “Simulation models alert on impact of climate change and need for smarter farming policies in Zimbabwe”

--- Page 2 ---

Peer reviewed assessments of adaptation needs co-produced with national stakeholders - Ex.: Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation for Dryland Farming Systems in Zimbabwe: A Stakeholder-Driven Integrated Multi-Model Assessment Climatic Change, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-021-03151-8

Policy Briefs and reports in support to countries' National Adaptation Plans. Ex.: Adaptation to climate change in Senegal: AgMIP's role of integrating regional research into National Adaptation Plans, published on the IPAR website (www.ipar.sn) on November 1st, 2021.

Information Briefs – Ex: Climate change adaptation impacts in mixed crop livestock systems in southern Zimbabwe - published in the AgMIP website on and available in the Publications list December 2021

Conference Presentations. Ex: Climate Change Impact on livelihoods of smallholders under current and future agricultural production systems in semiarid Ghana - 2021 ASA, CSSA and SSSA Annual Meeting in Salt Lake City, UT.

Policy and information briefs mostly target southern stakeholders in the three countries of focus, and they are produced with the direct involvement of those stakeholders, either as co-authors or as key informants and interviewees.

On the other hand, presentations at conferences, workshops and parliamentary audiences took place mostly in the USA and have been mostly targeting northern stakeholders, from academia all the way to members of the US Congress; while southern team members preferred direct dialogues with policy makers invited to participate in the project-lead events.

This reflects well a different strategy for research to impact, which is tailored to the countries where AgMIP teams operate (the northern Base-Team versus the southern Adaptation-Teams, or A-Teams). A more visible presence of AgMIP in the global North was a limitation of this project, giving its original objectives. On the other hand, it enabled AgMIP to inform foreign investments agencies and funds on adaptation, such as USAID and the Green Climate Fund.

If some of the AgMIP decision support tools, such as the Impact Explorer (IE), are not yet fully ready to be used by southern stakeholders in an autonomous way, they can already be used to better inform multilateral and bilateral funding and aid priorities and as such they are proving themselves more useful in research program design than in implementation of in-country National Adaptation Plans.

In summary, the different levels of participation in the production, discussion and dissemination of outputs reflected the priorities of different teams within the consortium, with southern A-teams more focused on specific objectives 1 and 2 on informing planning and strengthening the capacity of stakeholders, and the northern Base-Team more interested in specific objectives 3 and 4, of preparing new investment opportunities and strengthening the capacity of the A-teams in the use of the decision support tools.

A full list of outputs and corresponding hyperlinks is contained in the final technical report of the project, and all publications, protocols &amp; reports and tools are available of the AgMIP website.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

--- Page 3 ---

# Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Even though the team was more output- rather than outcome-oriented, the project raised a lot of interest among national stakeholders and it received requests for training and support from the following institutions, among others (see section on Results as well):

In Ghana: The Crop services department of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MoFA); the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); the CCAFS Policy Platform.

In Senegal: The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development; the Ministry of Agriculture; Parliamentary Network for the Protection of the Environment in

Senegal (REPES); the National committee on climate change (COMNACC).

In Zimbabwe: The Climate Change Management Department (CCMD); the Agricultural, Research, Innovation and Development Directorate Services.

The final technical report contains numerous examples of positive feedback by key representatives of such organizations.

The other notable outcome is that some southern partners, have been using the AgMIP tools and results in other projects, with and beyond IDRC funding. For example:

IPAR used Impact Explorer (IE) in a project assessing the effectiveness of COVID response measures to mitigate negative impacts on food systems in the Niayes region in Senegal (which is part of the "bassin arachidier", given that groundnut is one of the crop studies by AgMIP in the county), in preparing development actors on how to focus on specific crops in view of future shocks. The same IE was cited as an important diagnostic tool by the Senegalese Ministry of Agriculture in a recent knowledge translation event hosted by IPAR and discussing food sovereignty and opportunities to upgrade food value chains in the country.

Interest by the Civil Society and use of AgMIP tools to inform the agroecology transition in West Africa: in Senegal, the civil society has launched a discussion-oriented multi-actor platform called Dynamic for an Agroecological Transition in Senegal (DYTAES). This renewed interest in agroecology has provided a good opportunity to use the results of the Sustainable Development scenario studied by this project to improve the long-term resilience of agricultural systems to various climate shocks. Based on the income-based food security indicator, this scenario generates a significant reduction in poverty and food insecurity. AgMIP, through its results, has raised awareness on the benefits of investing in agroecology development. It is worth mentioning that this is also informing the work of the IDRC/Fondation Agropolis partnership on agroecology in francophone West Africa

In Ghana, Discussions are underway to include aspects of AgMIP data, models, and tools in "Agricultural Systems Simulation and Modelling", a postgraduate course hosted at the University of Ghana Department of Soil Science.

--- Page 4 ---

Finally, AgMIP has been contributing to international fundraising and to secure adaptation funds for the implementation of NAPs. For example, the CCAFS Science Policy Platform invited the Adaptation-Team to co-write proposal targeting support from the Green Climate Fund to Ghana. As a result, AgMIP methodologies are included in the overall package forming the application (now under review by the GCF).

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project also contributed to generate knowledge and solutions for large scale positive change, as the decision support tools developed by AgMIP are considered state-of-the-art in the climate and agricultural modelling field, and widely used in the research community.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: Use AgMIP tools and results to inform decision making and planning in the agricultural sectors at the national level in three countries: Senegal, Ghana and Zimbabwe

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre

--- Page 5 ---

processes?

The CLARE team expects to reflect on the usefulness of this monitoring and its dashboard in May 2022 to inform CLARE2 and share insights within IDRC. The template for technical reports was tailored to CLARE1 needs, focusing less on project activities and more on identifying how results aligned with program aims.

Financial and contractual negotiations with Columbia University were long, with the university's grant admin department inquiring on and proposing amendment to many standard clauses of the Grant Agreement. In the end, an agreement was reached when IDRC showed to the grantees two previous contracts which had been signed by Columbia and contained the same clauses.

Personnel costs were also much higher than recommended by IDRC budgetary guidelines (see GAD section in PAD), mainly due to very high salaries by the senior members of the Base Team in the US, and the negotiation on the indirect costs was long and "strenuous" as indicated in the PAD. Eventually, IDRC agreed in waiving thresholds on the Personnel costs but managed to keep Indirect costs low based on historical precedents that were shared with Columbia.

For the future, the PO notes that this is a rather common problem the Centre faces whenever entering in contractual agreements with US-based organizations and suggests that using the same thresholds of all types of organizations in all countries may be revisited.

Columbia was slow in making payments to the A-teams institutions. Even though this was not solely a responsibility of Columbia, as sub-grantees like ICRISAT were equally slow in producing reports unblocking payments, it suggests that some financial autonomy to country teams may have been preferable. However, this was largely not possible because all funds except the final holdback had to be awarded to a low-risk institution up front, due to the payment schedule of CLARE1. None of the other consortium partners – except for ICRISAT, which was not interested in leading the project - would have been able to subcontract Columbia nor to transfer funds internationally across the Atlantic.

The delays of payments between Columbia and ICRISAT slowed down significantly the initial phases of component 002 of the project, a smaller ~80k$ side activity dedicated to rapid data collection on the impacts of COVID-19 on food systems actors in Zimbabwe, in the same agroecological zones where the main activities were conducted. Considering that this additional work was designed to be done fast, it would have been more efficient to come into contractual agreement with ICRISAT directly. However, it was deemed easier and quicker for IDRC to open a new component of the same project giving the money to the recipient of the first component, without having to conduct a new institutional assessment process. This may be a sensible course of action in general, but given the slow interactions between Columbia and ICRISAT, the PO judges that in this case an exception may have been more efficient.

Delays accumulated due to the impact of COVID on many team members (for example most researchers at ICRISAT became positive due to an outbreak of the disease in the office), and the project eventually required a three-month extension, matched by a modest supplement that was used mostly to pay open access publication fees.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

--- Page 6 ---

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no issues related specifically to research ethics. AgMIP operated this project according to its standard charter (https://agmip.org/agmipcharter2/). The charter's principles are in line with those of IDRC.

Safeguarding procedures – Partnering with the United Kingdom requires IDRC and its grantees to implement proactive measures to prevent the exploitation, abuse, and harassment of vulnerable people. While CLARE1 projects collected data on existing protocols, IDRC and grantees were still learning how to fulfil these obligations and integrate them through activities.

AgMIP did fulfil these requirements, but it was not proactive. It took a very long time for the team to agree, assemble the required information, and comply. In the end, the protocol was the result of an “ex post” assessment rather than an “ex ante” set of measures. The protocol is now in use and will help the AgMIP team in their future work beyond IDRC funding.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

Michele captures the core tension in this project: cutting-edge science yet weak southern leadership meant some potential for impact went unrealized. AgMIP developed a unique set of protocols to link models of climate, crop production, and economy, essentially identifying promising areas for investment to make value chains and food security more climate resilient. For example, the finding that maize yields in sub-Saharan Africa could fall by a quarter before the end of century speaks to the risks to food sovereignty and need for agroecological transition. AgMIP has rich inputs to make into planning adaptation and finance, and there are some signs this was achieved. Yet more time and effort would be required for the in-country teams to truly own, lead, and innovate on these tools. Moving forward, CLARE needs to socialize and strengthen equitable partnership as collaborative modes of research that empower in-country teams in research design, methods, publications, and uptake. Ultimately ‘southern leadership’ in these dimensions can be more important than the location of the organization that receives and distributes funding. At the time of writing, AgMIP leader Cynthia Rosenzweig was announced to be the recipient of the 2022 World Food Prize. She is an energetic and committed champion for early career researchers and on tackling the future of food systems. Once the initial CLARE call for concept notes is complete, it will be useful to reflect on appropriate ways of engaging AgMIP in the coming month as well as coverage of the climate resilient food systems within the CLARE portfolio. - Bruce Currie-Alder

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

--- Page 7 ---

The AgMIP project has produced numerous scientific and policy publications, as presented in this PCR. Rightfully, the PO highlights the unbalanced of outputs vs outcomes in this project. This discrepancy is typical of short-time projects. There is an opportunity to learn how to leverage outputs into long-term outcomes beyond the project's life.

IDRC see should continue promoting the leadership of Southern-led research. There is a risk to the sustainability and scalability of evidence-based policies excessively driven by northern institutions. At the same time, the project team has demonstrated impact and robust research capacity. In this particular case, not only the timelines of the project were short, but the impact of COVID19 has probably been a factor in the imbalance of power.

The project is an excellent example of connecting IDRC/CRFS initiatives (i.e. COVID FS) to an EFP. The PCR demonstrates how IDRC can adapt exiting initiatives to core priorities and external limiting factors such as COVID. Lastly, this project illustrates the importance of bridge funding in building complex partnerships, such as CLARE. The funding allowed both continuations on the programmatic aspects and provided IDRC with resources to integrate a new initiative within the new strategy.

Santiago Alba-Corral

Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
