--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Generated new knowledge for policy influence:

This project resulted in 7 peer reviewed publications (exceeding its target of 6 publications) and 3 policy briefs (exceeding its target of 2 policy briefs). Additionally, the project was covered or mentioned by over two dozen media articles. Overall, the body of knowledge generated by this project is contributing to shaping Ghana's food policies. For example, the project was invited to present its findings at a stakeholders consultative meeting convened by Ghana's Ministry of Health as part of its efforts to develop a food policy bundle to assure healthier diets amidst rising diet-related non-communicable diseases in the country. Another example of policy influence is this communique that was issued by the project team and other key partners at the end of the National MultiStkeholder Nutrition Forum that was held in Accra in January 2020. The communique received coverage from notable media outlets in Ghana.

Strengthened local research capacity and though leadership:

The project supported several early career researchers and students including 2 post-doctoral fellows (both female), 2 PhD students (both female) and 4 Masters students (2 female). Further, the project's PI, Prof Amos Laar, is now viewed as a thought leader in the food systems space. His profile was featured in an article in the Lancet that described him as "one of the most active voices" in the fight against noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) in Ghana. He was invited to present his work at the International Strategic Dialogue on NCDs and the SDGs that was hosted by the Government of Ghana, Government of Norway, and the World Health Organization in Accra in April 2022. He is currently the PI of another IDRC project # 109864 that aims to build evidence and mobilize multi-stakeholder action toward a policy bundle for healthier and more equitable consumer food environments in Ghana.

Established a community of practice:

Prof Amos Laar and his team conceptualised and convened Africa's first Food Environment Research Network that brings together African researchers whose work relate directly to improving food environments in Africa, to share experiences, challenges and opportunities. The first FERN meeting (FERN2020) took place in November 2020 and was a success. With the theme "Connecting Food Environment Researchers across Africa," the meeting welcomed approximately 160 attendees from around the world each day. Attendees also received training on two INFORMAS modules. The second FERN meeting (FERN2021) took place in November 2021 was held in collaboration with the International Network for Food and Obesity/Non-communicable Diseases Research, Monitoring and Action Support (INFORMAS) Africa e-symposium series. With the theme "Leveraging Africa's Food Environment Research Network (FERN) to transform Africa's food systems," the meeting welcomed around 100 attendees each day.

Gender implications:

The project did not have any specific gender related findings. However, from a research capacity building perspective, it provided support to eight early career researchers, the majority of whom are female.

--- Page 1 ---

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Amos K Laar, Phyllis Addo, Richmond Aryeetey, Charles Agyemang, Francis Zotor, Gershim Asiki, et al. Perspective: Food Environment Research Priorities for Africa—Lessons from the Africa Food Environment Research Network. Advances in Nutrition, Volume 13, Issue 3, 2022, Pages 739-747, https://doi.org/10.1093/advances/nmac019.

Laar A, Kelly B, Holdsworth M, Quarpong W, Aryeetey R, Amevinya GS, Tandoh A, Agyemang C, Zotor F, Laar ME, Mensah K, Laryea D, Asiki G, Pradeilles R, Sellen D, L'Abbe MR and Vandevijvere S (2021) Providing Measurement, Evaluation, Accountability, and Leadership Support (MEALS) for Non-communicable Diseases Prevention in Ghana: Project Implementation Protocol. Front. Nutr. 8:644320. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2021.644320

Tsrah P, Quarpong W, Laar A. Healthiness of foods on promotional flyers of fast-food outlets located within Accra-based shopping malls. World Nutr. (2020) 11:51-61. doi: 10.26596/wn.202011351-61

Adjei, Akosua Pokua, Gideon Senyo Amevinya, Wilhemina Quarpong, Akua Tandoh, Richmond Aryeetey, Michelle Holdsworth, Charles Agyemang et al. "Availability of healthy and unhealthy foods in modern retail outlets located in selected districts of Greater Accra Region, Ghana." Frontiers in Public Health 10 (2022): 1-11. https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2022.922447/full

Amevinya GS, Quarpong W, Laar A. Commercial food advertising on the campus of Ghana's largest University. World Nutr. (2020) 11:57-73. doi: 10.26596/wn.202011257-73

Tandoh, Akua, Richmond Aryeetey, Charles Agyemang, Michelle Holdsworth, Gershim Asiki, et al. "The Africa Food Environment Research Network (FERN): from concept to practice." Global Health Promotion (2022): 17579759221126155. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/17579759221126155

Nanema, Silver, Akosua Adjei, Gideon Senyo Amevinya, and Amos Laar. "Some are healthy and others not": Characterization of vended food products by Accra-based food retailers." Frontiers in Public Health 10 (2022). https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9669954/

The MEALS4NCDs project. How ready is the education community to address marketing and Availability of unhealthy foods and drinks in and around basic Schools in greater Accra region? Policy Brief No 3: February 2022. Available online: https://www.meals4ncds.org/en/wp-content/uploads/Policy-Brief-Community-Readiness-to-address-marketing-and-availability-of-unhealthy-foods-in-Ghanaian-schools-1.pdf

The MEALS4NCDs project. Restricting the marketing of unhealthy foods to Ghanaian children. Policy Brief No 2: March 2022. Available online: https://www.meals4ncds.org/en/wp-content/uploads/Policy-Br

--- Page 2 ---

ief-Restricting-the-marketing-of-unhealthy-foods-to-Ghanaian-Children.pdf

The MEALS4NCDs project. Improving the nutritional quality of sold and provided foods in Ghanaian schools: priority recommendations for policymakers and key stakeholders. Policy Brief No. 1. January 2022. Available online: https://www.meals4ncds.org/en/wp-content/uploads/Policy-Brief-Improving-the-nutritional-quality-of-foods-in-Ghanaian-schools-1.pdf

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Advertisements for unhealthy food and beverages are prevalent on various platforms:

The project analyzed food advertisements on three platforms: National television, billboards surrounding schools in Accra, and in-store food placement. The research showed that 58% of the food advertisements on National television promoted unhealthy food and beverages. The most advertised food product was sugar-sweetened beverages, making up more than 25% of all advertisements. The most prevalent promotional technique was the utilization of promotional characters, appearing in over one-third of food advertisements. This trend was also observed in billboard advertisements, where 70% of food ads featured unhealthy products, with sugar-sweetened beverages and alcoholic drinks being the two most frequently advertised. The median number of billboards within 250 meters of a school was 14. Regarding in-store displays, the project found that 85% of the total shelf space in retail outlets was occupied by unhealthy food. Based on these findings, the project team suggests that the government of Ghana should consider implementing policies that limit children's exposure to unhealthy food and beverages. These policies could include restrictions on TV advertisements for unhealthy food and drinks during peak viewing times for children, as well as regulations for billboard placement that reduce the display of unhealthy food advertisements near schools.

Food provisioning policies and programmes in public primary schools in Ghana are weak

Using a global benchmarking tool developed by the INFORMAS network, the research team assessed the comprehensiveness and strength of Ghana's School Feeding Policy and Programme. The assessment showed that both the policy and programme were quite weak on certain key parameters. For instance, the nutrition standards/guidelines in the policy were not comprehensive and lacked any consequences for non-compliance. Additionally, there were no standards of guidelines for food and drinks sold within schools. The research team recommended that the government should establish and apply strong and comprehensive food-based and/or nutrient-based standards to the Ghana School Feeding Policy and Programme to provide a robust way of ensuring the nutritional quality of meals and beverages.

There is room to improve local communities' readiness to improve children's food environment

--- Page 3 ---

The research team used the Community Readiness Mapping (CRM) tool in the Accra region. CRM is a framework for assessing and enhancing the readiness of a community for interventions. The CRM tool comprises 36 open-ended questions covering five readiness dimensions: community awareness of initiatives, leadership, community environment, community understanding of the issue, and resources. The results revealed that the Accra region is at the Pre-Planning stage (overall readiness score=4 out of 9), indicating that although there are efforts underway to address the marketing and availability of unhealthy food and drinks near schools, there is a clear recognition among community members that more action needs to be taken to address the issue.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

There were no unintended results or outcomes from the project. The project's activities were disrupted by the Covid-19 pandemic and resulted in initials delays with fieldwork. However, the project team were able to catch up on the lost time and the project ended as planned.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change:

To the best of our knowledge, this project is the first of its kind in West Africa that provides evidence of the nature and extent of unhealthy foods and non-alcoholic beverage promotion. The World Health Organization recommends policy interventions such as restriction of marketing of unhealthy food and beverages aimed at addressing the rising global burden of NCDs. The evidence generated from this study is well positioned to influence policymakers in Ghana to implement policy reforms that will be beneficial to the health of Ghanaians.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow:

The project provided an opportunity to position an LMIC researcher, Prof Amos Laar, as one of the leading global voices in the food environment and health space. It also supported the several early career researchers, most of whom are women.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To measure, benchmark, and support public sector actions that create healthy food marketing and provision environments for children/adolescents.

--- Page 4 ---

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Aside from the disruptions to fieldwork caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, no unforeseen risks took place. However, these disruptions did not significantly impact the project's outputs and outcomes.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

--- Page 5 ---

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director CRFS: Santiago Alba-Corral

Ag. Director GH: Montasser Kamal

Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure

Regional Director, WARO: Julie Crowley

CRFS Team

Global Health Team

Communications: Angela Baiya, Lancelot Ehode

VP PPB: Dominique Charron

VP SRP: Julie Shouldice

Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin

Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon

GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
