--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 109698 - Policy foundations, country dialogues, and analytics for food system transformative integrated policy in Rwanda, Malawi, and Ghana  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Sam Oti  |
|  Former Responsible Officer | N/A  |
|  Principal Investigator | Elizabeth Kimani - Murage  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | African Population and Health Research Centre  |
|  Location: Country | Kenya  |
|  Location: Region | Sub-Saharan Africa  |
|  Area of research impact |   |
|  Internal Funding | CAD1,489,800  |
|  External Funding |   |
|  Project Start Date | 1/5/2021  |
|  Project Completion Date | 1/5/2022  |
|  Program theme sector |   |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Greg Hallen, for Sam Oti  |
|  Date of Report |   |

# Project Abstract

The imperative for food systems transformation is increasingly acknowledged by African governments and reflected in the strategic priorities of the African Union Development Agency. Despite some commendable progress with food security and nutrition, they have yet to achieve the intersectoral commitments and changes required for sustainable, resilient supply systems promoting gender and socio-economic equity, and for creating a nutritious food environment for consumers that addresses the growing double burden of malnutrition and non-communicable diseases.

This initiative will build momentum towards achieving sustainable healthy diets for all by working with the governments of Malawi, Rwanda, and Ghana, which have all committed to embarking on a food system transformation journey. Activities will synchronize with, inform, and respond to government-led food systems summit dialogues. They will strengthen capabilities for collation of data and deep analysis of food systems, promote regional and international knowledge exchange, and catalyze engagement of public, private, and social sector stakeholders necessary for the development of principle-based, transparent, coherent, and inclusive food system policies.

A standardized framework will be developed for food system analysis and diagnostics, applied in each country to generate valuable information for the dialogues and evaluated for scalable use internationally. Implementation research will strengthen the execution, outputs, and learnings from this initiative and inform subsequent plans for scaling the integrated food system policy journey in other countries.

This initiative is supported through the new Catalyzing Change for Healthy Sustainable Food Systems (CCHeFS) partnership between IDRC and the Rockefeller Foundation.

# PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Diagnostic and landscaping analysis in Ghana, Rwanda, and Malawi:

- Stakeholder mapping: The first step identified key stakeholders through mapping and pinpointed respective roles in the country's food system.
- Policy mapping: Followed by a policy mapping exercise, involving the analysis of existing food-related policies, and the identification of gaps in the policies and implementation strategies.
- Indicator Identification: The final stage of the process focused on highlighting potential indicators that can be used to monitor changes in food systems and evidence gaps within the three countries.

This analysis provided a comprehensive and concise diagnosis of the current food systems in each of the three countries, and helped to broaden the understanding of the various food system components.

Support to African government political commitments: This process has equipped leaders committed to developing and implementing transformative and integrated food systems policies to ensure sustainable health diets for all.

The results from the Food System Transformative Integrated Policy (FS-TIP) initiative have been very useful and have the potential to improve food systems policies and diagnostics, as they identify key food system challenges that stakeholders and governments can address. This innovative approach can be adopted in other countries and used as a tool in policy development tailored to each country's context and priorities.

The FS-TIP process also contributed to the UN Food Systems Summit 2021 to build a lasting platform for transformation, policy development, capacity building, innovation, and investment in country dialogues.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

- Comprehensive report highlighting project findings, (converted into a manuscript) which has been submitted to an open access peer review journal for publication. (BMC Public Health; an open access journal)
- A briefing paper was developed and disseminated to different stakeholders involved in the process: FS-TIP.pdf (aphrc.org)
- The tool kit developed from the FS-TIP process provided a comprehensive guide on how to conduct the landscape analysis and diagnostics and can potentially be

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

used in other countries: Food-Systems-Analysis-Toolkit.pdf (rockefellerfoundation.org)

- Landscape analysis and diagnostic reports: Rwanda Ghana Malawi
- Project findings were presented to different stakeholders including government officials from Rwanda, Ghana and Malawi, non-government organization officials and researchers. The dissemination meeting was held on the 16th of May 2022.
- Final briefing paper, including the evaluation

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Outputs were completed as planned, however an academic publication has yet to be accepted and published. This was not given priority given the focus on outputs that would directly inform the UNFSS dialogues and ongoing cross-sectoral planning.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The project was timely, as it was in part, seizing on the opportunity to respond to requests for assistance by national governments with their Member State Dialogues and related obligations to the UN Food Systems Summit. These cross-sectoral convenings, needs for data and rapid food systems analysis presented a time-sensitive opportunity for IDRC and Rockefeller Foundation to support catalytic action.

It was an ambitious multi-partner project that has provided critical inputs to the UN Food Systems Summit dialogues of 2021 that led to political commitments; it has generated a food systems diagnostic toolkit that is already being scaled up for use in multiple other countries; and the results of the analyses are continuing to be repackaged and used for project development and policy discussions. The results and process were the subject of discussion and presentations at the AGRF 2022. It contributed to new thinking for the development of a new project that is being led by AGRA, IFPRI and ILRI to re-purpose the CAADP food systems indicators for adoption at the level of the African Union.

5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

In most respects, the project exceeded expectations and contributed to significant outcomes, however to different extents in the three countries. The progress in Ghana and high-level political commitments at the UNFSS cannot be all attributed to this project, but it made a substantial contribution to the information needed to support those decisions. The Rwandan and Malawian governments also put the results to good use however with less ambitious goals set.

As the APHRC evaluation outlined, the pace and short duration of the project limited the depth and breadth of engagement with local food systems stakeholders, did not build long term structures for food systems governance, nor established significant local-level capacity for food systems analysis. Despite these weaknesses, which were acknowledged at the outset, the outputs remain of value and utility in each country and the toolkit continues to be used or adapted in other contexts.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC’s strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.

The project contributed to IDRC objectives as suggested it would in the PAD. The development of the food systems analysis methods were innovative and generated high quality outputs. There were effectively shared at an opportune and strategic moment. The work involved the development of a multidisciplinary alliance. There was a useful and partially successful attempt to engage multiple sectors across government, but this was ambitious and did not lead to securing long term multi-sectoral governance for food systems.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: support select national governments in Africa in the development of an ambitious integrated food system policy agenda that can be implemented to achieve sustainable, healthy diets for all their citizens. Click here to enter text.

☐4 Fully met
☑3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: Increase cross-sectoral engagement and food systems analysis in three African countries (initially) that will inform a response to local and international calls for healthier, more sustainable food systems

☑4 Fully met
☐3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: Strengthen capabilities in participating African countries for collation of data and deep analysis of food systems

☐4 Fully met
☐3
☑2
☐1 Not met

Comment: This was perhaps the least achieved objective as much of the data collation and analysis was led by external experts with just a few key local researchers learning from the experience.

Specific Objective 3: Catalyze and accelerate government-led dialogues among relevant public, private and social sector stakeholders necessary for the development of principle-based, transparent, coherent and inclusive food system policies

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

☐4 Fully met
☑3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The grant was issued to a long-standing, high capacity, trusted African institution (APHRC) to coordinate with a coalition largely established by our funding partners at the Rockefeller Foundation. The other coalition members included an international consulting firm, other regional and international agencies and local government partners. This was a new experience for APHRC. While they managed the project effectively and efficiently, the role APHRC played (primarily evaluation) was not central to the first phase of the project and they were not sufficiently engaged in, or informed of decisions made about human resources needed for delivery, which led to some late stage confusion about how and when supplementary funding could be accessed to cover work that was done by other partners. The uncharacteristic nature of this coalition project is unlikely to be replicated in future, however it demonstrates the importance of ensuring that the technical and administrative personnel of a lead agency in a coalition be fully abreast of the governance and management of the whole project.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

A risk outlined in the PAD was of inadequate local agency due to the significant role of the consulting firm and international NGOs. The leadership of APHRC with AGRA and AKADEMIYA2063 as key African partners did alleviate this risk however as expressed earlier, the pace and short duration of the project limited the level of long term leadership and capacity among local stakeholders. Never the less, the African organisations involved have plans to carry the learning and use of methods forward.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no unforeseen ethical issues. APHRC are strong in relation to ensuring ethics considerations and local approvals. Their principles and practices prevailed, despite some resistance among partners to the need for local IRB approvals.

# Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

Click here to enter text.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

# Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

This project addressed the need for food systems transformation, which is increasingly recognized by African governments and reflected in the strategic priorities of the African Union Development Agency and IDRC's CRFS's programmatic priorities. Despite food and nutrition security progress, the systemic changes required for sustainable, resilient supply food systems that promote gender and socio-economic equity and address the double burden of malnutrition and non-communicable diseases have not been fully achieved. The initiative successfully built momentum towards achieving sustainable healthy diets for all by collaborating with Malawi, Rwanda, and Ghana governments, who had committed to embarking on a food system transformation journey.

As described by the PO, some lessons can be learned from this PCR to prioritize the strategic alignment of roles and responsibilities, enhance communication and coordination among coalition members, invest in capacity building and knowledge sharing, incorporate flexibility in resource allocation, and emphasize regular evaluation and learning. Future IDRC programming could mitigate potential challenges and improve project management by aligning roles and responsibilities, improving communication, and ensuring capacity building. Flexibility in resource allocation allows for adaptation to changing needs while evaluation and learning mechanisms enable ongoing improvement and adjustment of strategies.

I approve this PCR.
Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS

# Action Items / Next Steps

Click here to enter text.

# Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Click here to enter text.

# Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

Last Revised March 2021
