--- Page 0 ---

*Most activities completed as of date of report, two components were extended to late 2022 to enable very modest value activities to wrap up.

## Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Informed update to Kenya's Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to include mangrove and seagrass conservation for both climate adaptation and mitigation.

Specifically, payment for ecosystem services (p8) and priority investment (Table 2) unlock a potential $0.8 billion for adaptation and $1.6 billion for mitigation by 2030 for community-based conservation of blue carbon.

Following consultations with the local school in Kiwegu, proceeds from carbon credits linked to Vanga Blue Forest supported school girls by funding routine provision of sanitary materials.

Coordinators of Mikoko Pamoja and Vanga Blue Forest, Mwanarusi Mwafrica and Rahma Kivugu, brought community practice into UN climate conference (COP26).

Began to scale into Tanzania via baseline social and forest surveys needed to replicate Vanga Blue Forest carbon credit scheme to help villages on the Tanzanian side of the border.

In Madagascar, forest-edge communities brought closer to policy makers to ensure carbon finance and nature conservation is more effective and pro-poor.

Worked with government to understand the drivers of forest fires in the highlands and eastern region.

Malagasy Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development invited the team to review and update key conservation policies related to their engagement with forest-edge communities, as well as safeguarding policy governing conservations officials in their engagement with local communities.

In the minister's words "Grâce aux recherches menées ... [le ministère] on conduit actuellement des réformes profondes sur notre politique de sauvegarde sociale dans nos zones protégées afin d'assurer que la conservation n'appauvrit pas les populations locales et que leurs droits humains soient préservés."

Malagasy lead, Sarobidy Rakotonarivo, was featured in journal Nature (16-Nov-21) "Meet the scientists behind the crucial climate summit". Four members of the Malagasy official COP26 delegation stayed at the personal residence of the PI's sister in Glasgow to save on accommodation costs.

In Ghana, new analysis of climate impacts on cocoa production generated interest from the Cocoa Board and private cocoa companies.

A unique dataset with private sector on cocoa production combined over seventy years of government and company information, to assess the impact of El Niño events on harvests. Project team changed behaviour of Cocoa Board to begin sharing data.

Identified recent and historic climate drivers of volatility in cocoa yields. Joint analysis of district-level data reveal cocoa production is $\sim 20\%$ lower the year of an El Niño event, with mild increase the following year. Meanwhile regional data shows this response arose after the 1980s (journal article

--- Page 1 ---

submitted)

Released open-source smartphone application to enable farmers to gain knowledge through more systematic observations on-farm, share learning with other farmers and catalyse locally generated adaptive management.

In Mozambique, wood fuel for charcoal production is the fourth largest industry in the country, generating up to 5% of GDP and employing over 5% of the population.

This grant generated new knowledge and informed local government to manage the charcoal industry, including state-of-the-art remote sensing.

Evidence generated convinced government to take the industry more seriously, particularly at district and provincial level, with movement towards regulating the sector.

At community level, team helped multiple communities learn from each other's experiences of the boom-and-bust cycle and articulate how the industry could be reshaped to work for local livelihoods.

Mix of research, social learning with local communities, and policy advocacy led to demand from government for input into charcoal policy (Massingir and Masengena districts), use of geospatial data by the provincial (Gaza) forest department to allocate licenses more sustainably, and revision of the national forest policy.

## Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Huxham and Dencer Brown (2020) Paris Agreement: five years on, it's time to fix carbon trading The Conversation

Lang'at et al (2021) Blue carbon solutions in Kenya's climate actions. Policy brief

Video - Voices from the forest: Putting local people at the heart of decisions about tropical forest's contributions to tackling climate change used for policy engagements, including aiding discussions between local communities and decision-makers and featured on BBC Radio 4).

Eklund et al. (2022) Elevated fires during COVID-19 lockdown and the vulnerability of protected areas Nature Sustainability

Jones et al (2021) Forest conservation in Madagascar: Past, present and future in SM Goodman (ED) The New Natural History of Madagascar. Princeton University Press.

Creedy, T.J., Asare, R.A., Morel, A.C. et al. (2022) Climate change alters impacts of extreme climate events on a tropical perennial tree crop Scientific Reports

--- Page 2 ---

Krauss et al (2021) 'To prevent this disease, we have to stay at home, but if we stay at home, we die of hunger'—livelihoods, vulnerability and coping with Covid-19 in rural Mozambique. World Development

Meyfroidt et al (2022) Ten facts about land systems for sustainability PNAS

SEOSAW partnership (2021) A network to understand the changing socioecology of the southern African woodlands: Challenges, benefits, and methods. Plants, People, Planet

Bowers (2021) REFORMA Geospatial Decision Support Tool for Mopane Woodland Management in Gaza Province, Mozambique.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

--- Page 3 ---

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 4: Uptake of research by three villages in southern Mozambique to plan for woodfuel harvesting and manage associated carbon emissions.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no issues related specifically to research ethics. Within the broader dimensions of trust and assurance, three observations are worth noting:

Working with private sector – the grant in Ghana represents a successful case of navigating sensitivity around access to data and creating additional value through joint analysis. The forthcoming journal article and next steps are quite promising.

Confronting country risk – In 2021, following an attempted assassination, Madagascar's president dismissed and largely replaced the cabinet. The Minister for environment retained her post, worked with the research team to proceed with engagement, and became a voice of reason within government to deal with drought and famine in country. The project leader and responsible officer discussed country risk during monitoring calls.

Safeguarding procedures – Partnering with the United Kingdom requires IDRC and its grantees to implement proactive measures to prevent the exploitation, abuse and harassment of vulnerable people. While CLARE1 projects collected data on existing protocols, IDRC and grantees were still learning how to fulfil these obligations and integrate them through activities. The robustness of grantee reporting

--- Page 4 ---

varied, yet included some stellar examples such as training and communication materials in local languages for both team members and local residents.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
