--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

An Excel-based model for simulating the impact of a sugar sweetened beverages (SSB) tax on the prevalence of overweightness and obesity in Kenya. The model takes cognisance that a 10 KES specific tax already exists on all soft drinks in the country. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first simulation in Kenya of the potential impact of SSB tax on obesity in Kenya. Although the model was developed and calibrated for Kenya, it can easily be adapted for other countries as well.

A memorandum on SSB tax proposals submitted to Kenya's National Treasury for the FY2021/22 and FY2022/23 during the national budget process. The project team had two meetings with the Treasury technical committee on budget proposals, which included officials from the Treasury and Kenya Revenue Authority. During these meetings, the team made oral submissions and discussed their proposals for excise tax adjustments on SSBs. The Committee received their presentations well and advised them to seek support from the Ministry of Health to reinforce their proposals.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

# Working paper:

The Likely Fiscal and Public Health Effects of an Excise Tax on Sugar sweetened Beverages in Kenya. Available here: https://www.ictd.ac/publication/likely-fiscal-public-health-effects-excise-tax-sugar-sweetened-beverages-kenya/

# Draft manuscripts:

Kimenju S, Omondi W, Wanyama R. Fiscal policy for NCDs prevention in Kenya: exploring potential ultra-processed foods for taxing. Available on SharePoint here.

Wanyama R, Omondi W, Kimenju S. Levels and Trends of Ultra-Processed Foods Consumption in Kenya. Available on SharePoint here.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The project's outputs were of acceptable quality. However, the project has not yet met its target of publishing at least three peer-reviewed papers. Only one working paper has been published as at the time of writing this report. An abridged version of the working paper and two other draft manuscripts are expected to be published in the near future.

--- Page 1 ---

The Covid pandemic also had an adverse effect on the project, causing disruptions that hindered face-to-face meetings. This particularly affected the engagement of policymakers and other government officials because in-person meetings tend to be a more effective means of reaching this group of stakeholders in Kenya. Nevertheless, the project succeeded in getting audience with key policymakers such as the previously mentioned meeting with the treasury technical committee on budget proposals.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Ultra processed foods account for up 12% of dietary intake:

According to the project's findings, ultra-processed foods constitute 12% of the total calorie intake in Kenyan households in urban areas compared to 4% in rural areas. Breads and scones are the most consumed ultra-processed foods, accounting for 62% of consumption, followed by sweets, chocolates, and biscuits (11.2%), pasta and instant noodles (10.9%), SSBs (5.9%), and spreads like margarine, jam, and peanut butter (5.3%). The study also found a positive and significant association between the consumption of ultra-processed foods and the likelihood of being overweight or obese among Kenyan adults. As a result, taxing the most consumed ultra-processed foods could be a strategy to decrease their consumption and contribute to reducing the prevalence of obesity and overweightness in Kenya.

An SSB tax will reduce consumption:

Even though the current data indicates that Kenya's per capita consumption of SSBs is relatively low, the tax simulation model suggests that if a tax of 0.3 KES per gram is implemented, the per capita consumption of SSBs is projected to decrease by 20%. This reduction is attributed to the increase in retail prices resulting from the tax. The model assumes that the SSB industry will fully pass on the additional cost to consumers, rather than absorbing some or all of it.

Government revenue will increase:

According to the model, if an SSB tax is implemented in addition to the current excise tax, the excise tax revenue is projected to rise by 140% (from 11 billion KES to 33 billion KES). Nevertheless, compared to other revenue sources, the revenue increase from this tax is modest due to the relatively small size of the SSB industry in Kenya.

Modest reductions in overweightness and obesity:

According to the model, if the SSB tax is implemented and results in decreased SSB consumption, the prevalence of overweightness among males is projected to decline from 20% to 18%, and among females from 32% to 30%. The prevalence of obesity among males is anticipated to decrease slightly from 3.1% to 2.7%, and among females from 8.4% to 7.4%. The decrease in the prevalence of overweightness (not obesity) is expected to be most significant among young people aged 15-29, while the reduction in the prevalence of obesity is projected to be most significant among individuals aged 30-59.

--- Page 2 ---

Overall, although the simulation model suggests that an SSB tax could have positive public health outcomes, it's important to note that it's not a panacea for the growing obesity epidemic in Kenya. The potential impact of an SSB tax is at best modest since obesity is a complex issue that involves various factors such as the food environment, lifestyle, genetics, socioeconomic status, and culture, to mention a few. Additionally, SSB consumption contributes only a small portion of total unhealthy food and beverage intake for most individuals. Nevertheless, the project recommends that, along with other obesity prevention measures, policymakers consider implementing an SSB tax in Kenya as it could potentially reduce the prevalence of overweightness and obesity while also generating revenue for the country.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The project was unable to include two datasets, namely the national STEPwise Survey 2015 and the Central Kenya urban food consumption survey 2015, in its analysis. The anthropometric data in the Central Kenya 2015 dataset was of poor quality due to the presence of too many outliers, while the STEPwise data did not include total household or individual food consumption data as anticipated. As a result, the project team focused their analysis on four datasets that were nationally representative, including the 2005 and 2015 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Surveys (KIHBS) conducted by the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. Additionally, they analyzed data from a study by the Tegemeo Institute of Agricultural Policy and Development in 2015, which involved 2,445 rural households in 22 counties. The team also included data from an urban food consumption survey in small towns in Central Kenya in 2012, which consisted of 453 urban and peri-urban households. All these datasets contained food consumption data at the household level and anthropometric indicators for adults.

The project had also initially intended to estimate their own price- and cross-price elasticities of SSBs in Kenya using publicly available national household survey data. Ordinarily, these estimates of elasticities were to be included in the SSB tax simulation model. As it turned out, the estimates of the price elasticities for SSB derived from the national survey did not make economic or logical sense. Against expectation, the analysis showed that the price elasticity estimates for SBBs were positive. This would imply that an increase in the retail price of SSBs will be associated with increased demand for the product. This finding goes against all economic theory and is unusable from a policy perspective as one cannot advocate for a tax-led price increase, which is then expected to increase SSB consumption. The data analysis was checked and cross-checked by different members of the team but still yielded the same unusable results. The conclusion is that there are likely data quality issues with the national survey data (these surveys took place in 2015/16). The team therefore had to use global estimates of price- and cross-elasticities of SSBs to develop the tax simulation model.

Lastly, no gender specific findings of interest emerged from this project even though the team conducted some sex-disaggregated analyses. This might have been different if the team had succeeded in engaging a local gender expert to support their work.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

--- Page 3 ---

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change:

This project is one of the first of its kind in Eastern Africa that provides evidence of the potential impact that a tax on SSBs will have on obesity. The World Health Organization recommends fiscal policy interventions such as taxation as one of several tools aimed at addressing the rising global burden of NCDs. The evidence generated from this study is well positioned to influence policymakers in Kenya to implement policy reforms that will be beneficial to the health of Kenya and generate additional revenue that could be invested in NCD prevention activities.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow:

The project provided an opportunity for the team and IILA and UCT to position themselves as leading voices on the issue of fiscal policy for NCD prevention in Sub Saharan Africa.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: The overall objective of the project is to promote healthy diets and prevent NCDs in Kenya by describing the association between obesogenic food products and NCDs among women in Kenya and the effect of fiscal measures on harmful food stuffs (specifically SSBs) on public health and tax revenue in Kenya.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1: To quantify the consumption of various ultra-processed foods; to explore their association with overweight and obesity; and to identify possible factors leading to higher overweight/obesity rates for women.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2: Use modelling techniques to generate evidence on the impact of a possible change in SSB taxation policy on public health, socioeconomic well-being, and government tax revenue.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3: To empower relevant stakeholders so that they can support the uptake and incorporation of research recommendations for fiscal solutions to promote healthy diets through

--- Page 4 ---

knowledge sharing, policy engagement and collaboration

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

No issues with financial performance of the project. The final financial report showed that the spent KES 15,826,629 / CAD 192,281 against disbursements of KES 16,164,410 / CAD 196,113. The analysis, therefore, indicated that the International Institute for Legislative Affairs (IILA) had a cash balance in hand totaling KES 337,781 / CAD 3,832. A refund request letter was sent on September 23, 2022. The refund has been received by IDRC treasury.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

The PAD identified two main risks. First, that there might be a backlash from the SSB industry in response to the findings of the project. To mitigate this, the project engaged policymakers and key stakeholders from the project's inception to ensure buy-in. So far, there have been no public reactions from the SSB industry to this project. The other risk identified in the PAD was the need for the project to engage external expertise to strengthen the gender-analysis component of the project. As it turned out, the project was unable to find a suitable local gender expert to support their work. They therefore decided, with approval from the responsible officer, to limit their gender-analysis to sex-disaggregated data analysis.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

International Development Law Organization.

--- Page 5 ---

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director CRFS: Santiago Alba Corral

Acting Director GH: Montasser Kamal

Regional Director, ESARO: Kathryn Toure

Global Health Team

CRFS Team

Communications: Angela Baiya

VP PPB: Dominique Charron

VP SRP: Julie Shouldice

Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin

Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon

GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
