--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 108901 Support to the Africa Green Revolution Forum 2019-2022  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Edidah Lubega Ampaire  |
|  Former Responsible Officer | Leone Michele  |
|  Principal Investigator | Dr. Agnes Kalibata and Mr. Amath Pathe Sene  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | AGRA on behalf of the AFSF Secretariat  |
|  Location: Country | Kenya  |
|  Location: Region | Nairobi  |
|  Area of research impact | Africa  |
|  Internal Funding | CRFS Regular Programming  |
|  External Funding |   |
|  Project Start Date | July 01, 2019  |
|  Project Completion Date | June 30, 2023  |
|  Program theme sector | Food security  |
|  Strategic framework indicator | Gender Equality and Inclusion  |
|  Author | Edidah Lubega Ampaire  |
|  Date of Report | November 2023  |

## Project Abstract

The African Green Revolution Forum (AGRF) has been one of the most visible and well-attended high-level agricultural and food security events in Africa. Originally focusing on the transformation of African agriculture, the Forum has, in its strategic plan 2023-2027, transitioned to become the **Africa Food Systems Forum (AFS Forum)**. The AFS Forum is the world's premier forum for convening stakeholders in food systems and Africa's agricultural landscape so that together, they can take practical action and share lessons that will transform African food systems. The Forum contributes to shaping the continental food systems agenda and measures its strategic progress in alignment with the African Union's leadership by reviewing data on the CAADP Biennial Review. The Forum brings together current and former heads of state, ministers, civil society and private sector agencies, research communities, development partners, CEOs of global, regional and national business companies, grassroots organizations, farmers, youth representatives, and global thought leaders to discuss and debate innovative and practical ways to promote investments and policy support for increased agricultural productivity and income growth for African farmers, and more recently, for building healthier, more inclusive, sustainable, resilient, and equitable food systems.

The AFSF provides an opportunity for IDRC to raise its visibility as a leading centre investing in research for development that is contributing to Africa's food system transformation. It also supports the connection of IDRC funded researchers to a broad and high-level constituent of actors in the food system, raising their profile and ensuring their research results feed into policy processes and practice. IDRC's technical and financial contribution to the AFSF plays a valuable role in continuing to highlight the role of research and innovation in driving an inclusive and context specific food system transformation in Africa. It also makes the AFSF Summit a premier platform for global and African leaders to discuss and develop concrete plans for achieving that transformation. On the other hand, the Forum provides opportunities for IDRC to further broaden our partnership base by developing new opportunities for collaboration with donor organizations, the private sector, and others.

One of IDRC's remarkable contributions to the AFS Forum has been to elevate the issues of gender and women in the agrifood system. Efforts included a steady and persistent bringing of women agribusiness owners and women smallholder farmers to the AFSF summit and gendered evidence in the forum discussions. Additional awareness was created through exhibitions of women led businesses at the Forum, breakfast sessions with first ladies in hosting countries and

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

integrating women researchers and leaders in panels. Thanks to IDRC's contributions, women and youth are currently acknowledged by all AFSF partners and in all thematic sessions as a critical force for the transformation of African food systems. These lessons are valuable for IDRC as we support the transition to a food systems approach in future engagements, by integrating non-traditional AGRF partners such as those in the health and nutrition sectors.

# PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

- The thought leadership, partnership and investments from. For example, from a gathering of 400 delegates when it started, the AFSF 2023 Summit pooled a physical attendance of 5,400 delegates, 54% women and youth, 90 countries, 5 heads of state, 6 former heads of state, 30 ministers, 1,200 private sector agencies, 80 international organizations and businesses. The AGRF 2021 Summit brought together over 8,500 delegates across 104 countries while the AGRF 2020 Summit was attended by more than 10,000 delegates.
- The AFS Forum has evolved over the years, thanks to the contributions of IDRC and other AFS Forum partners. First convened by Yara International in Oslo in 2006, the AFSF proceeded as an annual event (2007-2009) that focused on fostering public-private partnerships and mobilizing investments in African agriculture. Between 2010 and 2021 it was convened in different countries in Africa, and was consolidated as a pivotal platform for propelling the growth of Africa's agricultural sector. At the end of 2022, the AGRF was rebranded as the Africa Food System Forum to align with the partnership's vision of a comprehensive food system transformation. The Forum's focus currently extends beyond the annual summit to promote year around discussions and actions on pivotal decisions on food systems and food security.
- Ahead of the United Nations Food Systems Summit 2021 (UNFSS), the AGRF Summit 2021 provided an opportunity to shape and elevate the single coordinated African voice to the UNFSS and identified immediate actions and steps that need to be taken to accelerate progress and recovery towards inclusive agricultural transformation. Over 40 game changing solutions were profiled that enabled Africa to call for actions at the different nodes of the food system, including at different government administrative scales, and by different actors.
- The AGRF 2020 Summit was a call to action to rethink Africa's food systems to deliver more resilient, nourishing, and prosperous outcomes for all. It inspired and called for the adoption of concrete action and commitments from governments, regional institutions, the private sector, farmers and processors, and other stakeholders in the agriculture and food systems sectors. Specifically, the Summit provided an opportunity for strategic partnerships between governments, private sector, civil society and farmers' organizations in support of the agribusiness industry.
- Gender specific outputs: IDRC has been instrumental in advocating for the inclusion of women and gender responsive evidence in the Summit sessions and processes. In addition to IDRC efforts, COVID-19 brought to the fore the challenges women agripreneurs and farmers face, signalling the importance of sufficiently including women as key players in the transformation of the food system. Summit 2020 deliberately sought to include women and highlighted some of the most innovative emerging solutions, from input distribution at the farmer level to feeding children in cities. This helped to advocate for strong women leadership in the organization and delivery of the summit program, ensuring that over 43% of speakers were women. The increasing awareness of the role of women resulted in 57% women participation at AFSF Summit 2023. Youth engagement in the Forum activities has also been steadily increasing and diversified.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

1. AGRF-2019-Report- Compressed-1.pdf
2. AGRF-Summit-Report-web-2020-1.pdf
3. AGRF-2021-Summit-Report-FINAL-1.pdf
4. AGRF-Report_14_December_2022.pdf
5. AFS-Forum-2023-Report_FINAL.pdf
6. AFS-2023-Ministerial-Declaration.pdf
7. AGRF-COP28 -Voices-of-AGRF-at-COP-278 (1).pdf
8. COP27-Voices-of-AGRF-from-the-AGRF-2022-SUMMIT.pdf
9. AASR-2023-Empowering AFS for the Future.pdf
10. AASR-2021-A-Decade-of-Action- Building-Sustainable-and-Resilient-Food-Systems-in-Africa-1.pdf

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

All the anticipated outputs were completed and are of high quality. A diverse range of outputs are available on the Africa Food Systems Forum website.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Strengthened IDRC thought leadership: IDRC's thought leadership, strategic engagement, and financial support to the AFSF provides an opportunity for IDRC senior leadership to sit at the Forum's steering committee and participate at AFSF Summit panels. Second, it enables the responsible Senior Program Specialist to participate in all AFSF Partners meetings, including co-chairing the Women in Agriculture Thematic Platform with AGRA. Third, it enables IDRC to host side events during the annual Summit. These opportunities have enabled IDRC to influence food system stakeholder discussions, and shape AFSF Secretariat actions and decisions as a valued partner.

Growth of the AFS Forum: IDRC is one of the early AFSF partners that supported the initial relocation of the AGRF in 2010 to Africa from Oslo, where it was originally hosted by Yara International as an international conference. Even though the AGRF secretariat shifted from Yara to AGRA in 2010, the AGRF the focus remained on Agriculture. IDRC's strategic and consistent engagement with AFSF since the start has contributed to transforming the AGRF from an international conference on agriculture in sub-Saharan Africa into a continental forum where African priorities are discussed among key stakeholders and commitments are renewed annually. It has further supported the transition from the focus on agriculture to a food systems perspective, a process that started in 2022. Moreover, the AFS Forum is increasingly being used to discuss and track government commitments and progress on the CAADP performance indicators, which aligns with and enables uptake of evidence generated from other work supported by IDRC (CCHFeFS project 110115).

Strengthened focus on women and youth in food systems: IDRC's contributions to the AFSF have helped the AFS Forum to intentionally target and include women and youth in the Forum activities, both during year-round activities and the annual Summit. IDRC, through the co-chair of

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

the Women in Agriculture Thematic Platform spearheaded inclusion of women in the Forum by bringing in evidence and diverse initiatives (see details in abstract). Currently, the AFSF Forum, partners and stakeholders have embraced the inclusion of women and youth in year-round and Summit activities. Thus, the AFS Forum has provided opportunity to discuss gender and social inclusion evidence and lessons with key stakeholders in Africa.

Increased visibility for IDRC partnerships: As explained in section 6, the AFSF annual summit has been a prime space for meeting and discussing with diverse partners and making visible IDRC's partnerships with other donors and researchers. Participation in the AFSF Partners Group also provides access to many like-minded donor organizations such as BMGF, Rockefeller, FAO, IFAD, USAID, etc.

5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The outcomes were achieved as expected.

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic/core objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project was developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

Even though the project officially started in July 2019 under strategy 2015-2020, the bigger part of implementation happened under strategy 2030. I thus report the project contributions within the frame of the 2030 strategy. The project contributes directly to the strategic objective of sharing knowledge for greater uptake and use. The AFSF remains the largest gathering of agriculture and food system stakeholders in Africa. Section 1 highlights significant increments of numbers in attendance, and the diversity of stakeholders that participate. IDRC's thought leadership and investment in the forum has throughout the years opened opportunities to bring scientists and thought leaders to speak at the AFSF main sessions and at IDRC convened side events, presenting the results of their research to policy makers, leaders, and all food system stakeholders. One resounding success is IDRC's contribution to make visible the significant role women play in the food system, which was birthed by consistently presenting gender specific evidence and engaging women leaders in the discussions. Thus, the forum continues to increase the reach and impact of IDRC-supported research in driving solutions, and influencing national, regional, and global development agendas. Also, the events convened by IDRC at the margins of the AFSF Summit offer greater opportunities for increasing IDRC's visibility through launching new partnerships, programs, wider dissemination of evidence, and technical consultations with experts in the field.

To a moderate extent, the project contributes to the strategic objective of mobilizing alliances for impact in two major ways. The AFS Forum is a place IDRC can meet and discuss with many diverse partners, including donors, senior government officials, private sector actors, research partners and others. The discussions held with different groups help to strengthen existing partnerships, develop new funding visions, cut co-funding deals, and make visible the solidarity of existing partnerships. In the past, IDRC has been able to announce partnerships such as with ACIAR and Rockefeller Foundation and has hosted discussion panels constituted by co-funding partners such as Rockefeller Foundation, ACIAR, GAC, BMGF, at IDRC side events. Additionally, we have used AFSF Forum spaces to bring together grantees and consulted on research issues in their context and generated inputs useful for our programming.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To catalyze agricultural transformation in Africa through multi-year high-level convenings bringing together private sector, government, bilateral and multilateral donors, civil society organisations, farmers organisations, and other stakeholders.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To facilitate the convening of the AGRF including convening of the forum, support to pre-forum thematic discussions with key stakeholders, development of key case studies, background, and framing papers on selected thematic areas of mutual interest between AGRA and IDRC.

☐ 4 Fully met
☑ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: To support the participation of key speakers, panelists, thought leaders, researchers and development experts, and grantees in the AGRF events

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 3: To facilitate the organization of key high-level dialogues linking research to policy on specific topics of mutual interest such as women in agriculture.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

## FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

AGRA has strong financial systems, and the granting system has been very efficient. With over 30 partners that fund the AFSF, reporting to these partners has created a huge workload for AGRA. While the financial report must align with the IDRC reporting requirements and only report on the IDRC grant, partners agreed to use the same reporting format for the technical report to create efficiencies. The agreed reporting format meets the IDRC reporting standards and provides sufficient information to track the progress of the grant.

## STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Potential risks described in the PAD were related to (i) lack of adequate funds and potential inability to rally enough partners to convene the AFSF; mitigations strategies included multiple funding options, including multiple options for fundraising from corporate sponsors and in-kind support from host governments. (ii) positioning IDRC as a thought leader in the AGRF without sufficient investment in time and resources, the threat being that IDRC's financial contribution could be considered marginal compared to other donors and private sector organisations who were contributing much more to the AGRF. Ensuring that IDRC's contributions are valued and recognized would require that (a) IDRC staff would ensure that IDRC provides intellectual contributions in areas of expertise and interest to the Centre, (b) IDRC's Senior Managers will be involved in critical AGRF events and in nurturing relationships with other key members of the Partners Group such as FAO, IFAD, the Rockefeller Foundation amongst others, and (c) IDRC Senior Managers and Program Officers would also serve as key speakers in selected sessions of the AFSF.

In general, the proposed mitigation strategies were effective. IDRC staff continued to give thought leadership on the role of women in the agrifood system and in building resilience to a changing climate. Also, IDRC senior managers consistently participated in AFSF events and annual Summit. The AFS Forum secretariat has been mobilising resources from diverse stakeholders and the number of AFSF Partners (donors) has grown to include non-traditional donor agencies such as private sector agencies, CGIAR, and commitments from Summit host governments. Whereas the AFSF budget ambition is not yet met, the Secretariat has reportedly continued to negotiate with existing partners to increase their contributions and is engaging with new potential funders. IDRC is not only an AFSF partner but also sits on the Steering Committee. Unlike other donors who sit on the committee because they contribute more finances (250k and above), IDRC sits on the steerco because of the technical contributions to gender. If the qualifications to the SteerCo do not change during the transition phase, IDRC must keep on innovating to maintain this position since our financial contributions fall below the bar. This requires inputs from both the responsible SPS and the senior global contact to the AFSF. One of the easier ways to keep ties with the AFSF is to have a Senior Manager representing the centre at the annual Summit.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

The project did not have any unforeseen ethical issues.

## Program Leader / Manager comments

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

This PCR is useful for me and others to learn more of the background to the AGRF/AFSF and how it has developed and is relevant to our thinking about our ongoing sponsorship, technical support and contributions to the Forum via our staff and grantees.

The shift towards being a forum for a greater diversity of issues, sectors and people must now be put into practice and be reflected in our engagement with Forum drivers. This includes ongoing contributrions to the Women in Agriculture, and Nutrition and Health thematic platforms. Our CCHeFS initiative also offers opportunities for bringing an increasing presence of public health issues and people to the Forum, thereby potentially exposing challenges/gaps, and promoting coherence between the agriculture, nutrition and health objectives of the Forum. As Edidah notes above, our engagement with AGRA on strengthening CAADP indicators to reflect current ambitions for food systems transformation should also gain profile through the Forum. This won't be easy as competing priorities of AGRA and their donors will emerge, and IDRC time commitments will be limited. Supporting opportunities for the leadership and influence of our African grantees should remain our priority.

I look forward to working with Edidah and the CRFS team on the next few years of participation with the AFSF.

Greg Hallen
Team Leader, CRFS.

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

I think it is important to pay attention to how the PO underscores in this PCR the pivotal role of knowledge sharing in advancing food system transformation. By aligning with the strategic objective of disseminating knowledge for broader uptake and utilization, the project not only contributed valuable IDRC's research results but also played a crucial role in influencing national, regional, and global development agendas. By bringing the voices of African researchers, the events organized by IDRC at the AFSF Summit emerged as pivotal platforms, fostering partnerships, launching new initiatives, and facilitating technical consultations. These initiatives not only elevated IDRC's visibility but also showcased its commitment to enhancing knowledge sharing among diverse stakeholders.

Following IDRC commitment to gender equality, IDRC emerged as a catalyst, actively addressing the gender disparities within the agrifood system. Through intentional efforts such as bringing women agribusiness owners and smallholder farmers to the forefront of the AFSF summit, integrating women researchers into panels, and featuring exhibitions of women-led businesses, the project played a key role in raising awareness and advocating for gender inclusion. This strategic approach resulted in a notable increase in women's participation at the AFSF Summit, demonstrating IDRC's commitment to fostering gender-responsive evidence and representation.

I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

IDRC's contribution to the AFSF has been renewed and remains a key, strategic event for the centre to influence. A major objective in the next four years is to support the transition from an Agriculture focused AGRF to an AFSF by deliberately targeting and including health and nutrition stakeholders.

## Distribution list

--- Page 7 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

## Notes
- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
