--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Project launch at COP25 in Madrid, Spain - A side event was held December 4, 2019 in the Francophonie Pavilion at COP 25 in Madrid, Spain to launch the project. The event was attended by approximately 75 people and included remarks by representatives of IDRC, IOF, AGNES and COMIFAC. The project was well-received by attendees and considered innovative in its focus on francophone countries, rejuvenating and strengthening the team of negotiators, providing opportunities for youth mentorship and focus on integrating the gender dimension throughout.

Preparatory meeting for francophone African countries (March 2020) - The project supported a preparatory meeting for francophone African Countries in advance of the strategic meeting of the full AGNES network in June 2020. The meeting, which was co-financed by FAO and held March 9 to 11, 2020 in Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire involved participation of 35 experts (one third of whom were women). The meeting and its outputs (see below) demonstrates the active participation that was mobilized by the project, and which the project intended to build upon before the pandemic made travel and in-person meetings impossible. Further, half of the participants were from research institutions and universities. The ease of producing the position papers during this meeting demonstrated to all the value that scientists could bring in support of climate negotiators.

Submission of the African Group of Negotiators to SBSTA/SBI on the Koronivia Joint Action for Agriculture on themes 2e and 2f - One of the specific objectives of the Abidjan meeting was to elaborate a draft submission of the French-speaking African countries related to the Koronivia Joint Action for Agriculture roadmap. Specifically, the group elaborated a draft submission on theme 2.e. related to the improvement of livestock systems, including agropastoral production systems and theme 2.f. on the socio-economic and food security dimensions of climate change in the agriculture sector. As AGNES and the African Group of Negotiators were unable to hold their preparatory meetings in late March 2020, the submissions drafted by the French-speaking African countries were eventually used as the African position.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Réunion des pays francophones d'Afrique préparatoire à la réunion stratégique du Groupe d'experts d'appui au Groupe Africains des Négociateurs sous la CCNUCC – Communiqué finale

Soumission du Groupe Africain des Négociateurs au SBSTA/SBI sur les travaux conjoints de la Koronivia sur l'Agriculture sur les thèmes 2e et 2f

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

--- Page 1 ---

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

This project intended to support several in-person meetings, the participation of francophones in AGNES preparatory meetings and global climate negotiation sessions (SB 52 and COP26), and a youth mentorship program, all of which became impossible to deliver as originally planned after travel and in-person gatherings were restricted from March 2020 onward given the COVID-19 pandemic.

The project also intended to translate training modules on Gender in National Climate Policy into French but the contact at the African Development Bank working to finalize the English version of the modules failed to share the final version with the team despite repeated requests.

Project activities and reporting incurred delays, and the team was slow to adapt their activities. When they did finally develop an adapted draft workplan following the PO's encouragement, and the potential of granting a no-cost extension was discussed, they failed to address the PO's feedback and never presented a workplan that was coherent. The option was further discussed with the new project lead when the PI was replaced in June 2020, but ownership for this project was ultimately lost with the departure of the original PI.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

As outlined in the PAD, the project was important to fund as it responded to real barriers identified during a session hosted by IDRC and ECCC during COP24 in Katowice, Poland to explore gaps and opportunities for supporting African negotiators. The project proposal was co-developed with key francophone members of the AGNES network and the lead was identified by these members.

The main impact of this project may be the conversations that were initiated with Dr. George Wamukoya and the AGNES network to consider how best to foster active participation and contributions by francophones and the practical ideas that were generated (e.g. support for simultaneous translation during meetings, translation of key documents, meetings organized for francophone countries, etc.).

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

This project was significantly impacted by the pandemic and the departure of the PI, as noted above. Ultimately the project did not have ownership within COMIFAC and despite the new management's initiative to appoint a new project lead, the steps required to move forward with the project were not taken. The project ran out of time and given lack of ownership and lack of responsiveness, there was no justification for extending the project.

Despite the fact that this project did not deliver as planned, some of the intended objectives were still reached by virtue of engaging the francophone members of AGNES during the project planning and

--- Page 2 ---

development stage to understand barriers and opportunities and through the initial project activities. I learned from a conversation with AGNES lead, Dr. George Wamukoya, that these early efforts have led to enhanced integration and engagement of francophones within the network. Moreover, Dr. Wamukoya shared that the virtual Climate Governance, Diplomacy and Negotiations Leadership Course developed by AGNES with IDRC support (108693) included significant participation by francophones supported by francophone course facilitators and the provision of simultaneous translation for participants.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

The project expanded the Climate Change program's activities in Francophone sub-Saharan Africa, a priority region for IDRC, and took initial steps toward building the leadership of climate change researchers and negotiators in Francophone Africa.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment: Given that most planned activities were not implemented, the project made limited contribution to increasing capacity.

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

--- Page 3 ---

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC’s administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

This project spent only 12% of its total budget. The team was late with the initial reports, was slow to adapt activities to pandemic restrictions, and failed to deliver timely or satisfactory reports for the subsequent periods. The project did not seem to receive priority attention by the PI, possibly due to the fact that he was the Executive Director for COMIFAC and may not have had adequate time to devote to it. Ultimately, the project would have benefited from closer monitoring, but the PO’s workload expanded with assignment to the CLARE initiative and was further challenged by the pandemic situation after March 2020 and into 2021 due to child care responsibilities during weeks of school and daycare closures.

The responsible GAD officer changed at least 3 times during the project. Nevertheless, upon taking over this file in the fall of 2021, Elizabeth Mohan and the PO have worked well together to communicate to the new management team at COMIFAC the importance of completing the technical and financial reporting for this project despite being a low priority for the new management. In the end, we have received both the final technical and financial reports and, with polite but persistent follow up, managed to negotiate the return of cash on hand remaining ($45,500) to IDRC (in progress at the time of writing).

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Two unanticipated risks ended up being much more significant for this project than the original risks identified in the PAD. First, the global COVID-19 pandemic which, as mentioned above, made it impossible to proceed with the project as planned. Second, the change in the management team at COMIFAC in June 2021, including the departure of the PI, resulted in lack of ownership of the project by the lead institution and ultimately lack of achievement of intended activities and results.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

N/A

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

--- Page 4 ---

There is not much to add to this PCR. As the PO and PL discussed, it was not easy to anticipate COVID-19. It was difficult to foresee the duration of the pandemic and its impact on global travelling. This project relied highly on traveling and in-person meetings. It was a new circumstance for almost everybody. Now we have learned how to be more efficient in a virtual space, and capacity building, conversations, and negotiations happen daily.

However, it is essential to mark some of the comments from the PO and PL. We cannot underestimate the impact on the success of this project due to the lack of time (focus or priority) of the PI. Many other projects and PIs adapted to the new reality, and most of the IDRC programs adjusted and continued delivering during the pandemic.

I congratulate the IDRC team on the continued efforts to close this initiative with the minimum impact on finance and accountability following IDRC grant management's best practices and process.

Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS
## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
