--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

The main results of this RSP were insights and recommendations from commissioned scoping studies that served to inform the design and implementation of the new phase of climate adaptation programming, Climate Adaptation and Resilience (CLARE).:

The study on partnerships provided lessons on effective partnerships based on the experiences of past collaborative programming. Recommendations on how to integrate partnership considerations into the research commissioning stage have already been applied to the CLARE research call (launched April 2022).

The study on Gender Equality and Social Inclusion provided practical recommendations of how to effectively integrate gender equality and inclusion (GEI) considerations into climate adaptation programming, both in terms of having GEI-focused projects and integrating GEI into all aspects of the program design. Considerations specific to research commissioning were applied to the CLARE research call, including providing detailed guidance to applicants, specific requirements and evaluation criteria on GEI, and an additional GEI-focused proposal review.

The Network and bibliometric mapping of climate change adaptation and resilience research provided empirical confirmation of the continued under-representation of women and southern authors in adaptation and resilience research. This further supports the continued emphasis on southern leadership and gender equality and inclusion (GEI) that are critical and central approaches to the CLARE programme.

The CLARE online monitoring centre was created to enable the 17 CLARE 1 transition projects to upload their own output and outcome data, which also linked to a dynamic dashboard of results. This monitoring tool facilitated reporting to the FCDO donor partner on logframe outputs and outcomes and enabled easier consolidation of programme results.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Three main outputs were generated from this project as part of the scoping and learning to help inform CLARE design. All three are open access and available on the IDRC digital library:

Scoping study on commissioning research and improving the effectiveness of partnerships in CLARE: a practitioner's perspective by Julie Mundy, Independent Partnerships Specialist (open access on IDL)

Integration of gender equality and social inclusion considerations into CLARE: the 'what' and the 'how' by Anouka van Eerdewijk, Yngve Braten and Katrine Danielsen from KIT Royal Tropical Institute (open

--- Page 1 ---

access on IDL)

Network and bibliometric mapping of climate change adaptation and resilience research by Etienne Vignola-Gagné, David Campbell and Henrique Pinheiro from Science-Metrix (open access on IDL)

Two webinars presented on the results and recommendations of the scoping studies to engage with IDRC and FCDO. These are not publicly shared, but are accessible to IDRC colleagues and webinar participants:

Partnership study webinar with Julie Mundy (not public but shared with participants and colleagues)

GEI Scoping Study Webinar (not public but shared with participants and colleagues)

One online monitoring platform and dashboard, which is online and accessible to all.

CLARE Monitoring Centre (for transition projects output and outcome monitoring, 2019-2022), and the associated results dashboard.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Primary outcomes from this project included how the scoping studies were used to inform the design of the new phase of climate adaptation programming. The scoping studies commissioned as part of this project on partnership, GESI, and the network analysis, also complement additional scoping studies that were used to inform CLARE design.

The scoping study on commissioning research and improving the effectiveness of partnerships in CLARE, led by partnership practitioner Julie Mundy, provided lessons on effective partnerships based on the experiences of past collaborative research projects supported under CARIAA and other climate adaptation predecessor programs supported by FCDO such as Future Climate for Africa (FCFA), etc.

In particular, this study provided insights around layers of inequity and power imbalances, scale and complexity of research consortia, and the critical role of leadership at different levels.

Particular recommendations about how to support equitable and effective partnerships through how research is commissioned (i.e. partnership assessed as part of the selection criteria of proposals) have already been implemented as part of the Climate Adaptation and Resilience (CLARE) funding call that was launched in April 2022.

The scoping study on Gender Equality and Social Inclusion led by the Royal Tropical Institute, or KIT, provided concrete recommendations on how to effectively and intentionally integrate GEI throughout the climate adaptation research cycle, from research commissioning, evaluation, implementation, and analysis.

--- Page 2 ---

Many recommendations have already been applied to the design and implementation of the CLARE research call. This has included establishing a target for supporting at least one GEI-specific project per theme, while also requiring projects to be at least GEI-integrated. Additional guidance on GEI expectations, definitions, and approaches were shared with all applicants, a clear articulation of GEI approaches and expertise within the team were required as part of the concept note and full proposal and were assessed as part of the proposal evaluation criteria.

As a result of this scoping study, the CLARE team is connected to a strong network of GEI experts, has been able to centre GEI as a main approach to climate adaptation research in this next phase of programming, and has been able to innovate new ways of commissioning research that will hopefully positively impact the GEI leadership and outcomes in this new phase of climate adaptation programming.

The Network and bibliometric mapping of climate change adaptation and resilience research showed that:

There has only been a marginal increase in women's authorship on climate adaptation since 2005, accounting for one-third of authorships in the recent period. This extends beyond contributions to publications, as women are also found to be less prominent within existing research network collaborations.

The report also indicated a widening gap between authors in the Global South and the Global North, with Northern-based authors remaining more central in networks.

North-South co-publications were found to potentially decrease the prominence of southern authors within research networks, and a trend of decreasing centrality of authors based in lower- and lower-middle income countries.

The findings from this study provide further evidence to research funders such as IDRC to support southern-led research and women researchers on teams to help address these gaps.

The CLARE Monitoring Centre:

Enabled easy collection of project outputs and outcome indicators through google forms accessible through the Monitoring Centre website.

These indicators able to be pulled into spreadsheets for ease of validation and analysis for the IDRC team. This helped with reporting requirements especially for the donor partner, FCDO' yearly annual reviews. They were also publicly shared through the Monitoring Centre through the online, dynamic dashboard, allowing projects to see their and other projects' progress in near real-time.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

There were delays in the Gender and Social Inclusion (GESI) scoping study due to illness on the consulting team. In the end, the delay worked to the benefit of the CLARE team as the GESI study was able to more fully incorporate the current design of the programme and provide very useful, concrete suggestions on how to integrate GEI into the project through the commissioning and early stages of programme implementation.

--- Page 3 ---

Unexpected (positive) outcomes include a strong network of GEI experts connected to the CLARE team, in part due to the fact that this was the only scoping study that was commissioned through a competitive call (by invitation) and since the KIT methodology included a consultation with a group of GEI experts working on climate change adaptation. The team was able to later draw on this network of GEI experts to:

- Participate in a GEI session for the Adaptation Research Alliance (ARA) in fall 2021
- Recruit four GEI and climate adaptation experts to serve as reviewers for a GEI-focused review of all 48 full proposals submitted to CLARE (fall 2022)

The detailed and practical recommendations from both the partnerships and GESI scoping studies also turn out to be highly relevant to IDRC’s approach to research programming and Strategy 2030. Efforts have been made to socialize the studies, through engagement of some colleagues in the webinars, a notice on Mahali, sharing the KIT study with the GEI Leadership Team, and also through a presentation by the responsible PO on the GESI study for the CRFS team in July 2022,

- How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC’s strategic objectives?
- Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
- Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

- Invest in high-quality research and innovation in developing countries
- Not only did this project support scoping studies that helped to contribute to current and future climate adaptation research, they also directly help to inform the design and development of the CLARE programme to be better integrate elements key to success (such as GEI, partnerships, and southern leadership).

## Objectives

- Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

- On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

- 4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

- Specific Objective 1:
- 4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

--- Page 4 ---

Specific Objective 2:
4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:
4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 4:
4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 5:
4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 6:
4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The investment in creating the CLARE online monitoring centre did allow for simple compilation of project outputs and outcomes and yet it required an additional task on top of technical reporting for grantees. To ensure research partners contributed data in a timely manner, this task was added as an extra milestone in CLARE 1 grants, generally coinciding with their technical reporting schedule. This created some extra exchanges and delays in GAD payments as the online system was outside of SharePoint and GAD had to check with the responsible POon the completion status of this milestone. A consideration for design of future MEL systems is the integration with existing reporting and whether entering project output and outcome data should be a formal milestone tied to payment.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

--- Page 5 ---

No lessons to report.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

All the pieces of work described above represent efforts to innovate on IDRC systems and partnership: how to facilitate cooperation among grantees working as a research consortium, how to integrate GEI from research focus to team composition and more, how IDRC funding can influence the structure of research networks, and how to aggregate results against the partnership logframe. Insights generated under this project were integrated into the CLARE Business Case (available on FCDO devtracker project 300126) and shared in the FAQ for prospective applicants to the CLARE call in 2022.

An intention behind the online monitoring was to displaced part of the workload of grantees in preparing technical reports, and lighten the workload of IDRC staff in aggregating across these to compile program-level results. While partially successful in the latter, POs found they still required an additional level of detail. The partnership crafted a tailored outline for technical reports during the CLARE1 set of projects.

The network analysis showed potential and pitfalls. A key lesson is the need to start such analysis with a more precise dataset. The output produced under this project embrace a wide macro-level literature tagged under the broad 'topics' of bibliometric databases. In contrast, a study by Vincent &amp; Cundill focused on three prominent journals, while Nalau &amp; Verrall use a more meso-level analysis of research themes. To start over, IDRC could have used the CLARE themes as the entry point, adding an analysis of 'what' research questions are covered in the exiting literature alongside the analysis of 'who' participates or under-represent in these networks.

I recognize and celebrate the hard work and persistence shown by Heidi throughout this project. She sustained the working relationship with KIT consultants throughout the challenges of the pandemic, bring a genuine human touch to the professional relationship and ultimately achieving an output that surpassed our expectations. Her work under this project served to refine and reinforce IDRC's position on these topics, serving to distinguish our organization as a funder and what we offer when mobilize alliances/work in partnership.

Bruce Currie-Alder, program leader, climate resilience

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

All the pieces of work described above represent efforts to innovate on IDRC systems and partnership: how to facilitate cooperation among grantees working as a research consortium, how to integrate GEI from research focus to team composition and more, how IDRC funding can influence the structure of research networks, and how to aggregate results against the partnership logframe.

I approve this PCR

--- Page 6 ---

Santiago Alba-Corral

Director CRFS.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
