--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Generated new knowledge:

This project resulted in 9 peer reviewed articles published as a special issue in the open access journal Global Health Action. With the support of the Conversation Africa, the project team also published 6 Op-Eds that have so far garnered over 5500 reads. Collectively, these publications provide evidence in support of fiscal policies for NCD prevention in Eastern and Southern Africa.

Strengthened local research capacity:

One of the specific objectives of this project was to strengthen local research capacity. Seven emerging researchers (1 per country) received technical support from the project team throughout the project duration. Further, three PhD candidates participated in the project and a fellowship was awarded to an MPH student to work on issues relating to SSB taxation.

Deepened South-South research partnership:

The project enabled the research team at PRICELESS SA to lead peer-learning among researchers across the seven study countries. These kinds of South-South collaborations are essential for catalysing a community of practice in what has hitherto been an under-researched field in Sub-Saharan Africa. The team at PRICELESS SA led by Prof Karen Hofman have established themselves as thought-leaders on the issue of fiscal policies for NCD prevention. Their previous work (also funded by IDRC: project 108424) informed South Africa's tax on sugar sweetened beverages (known officially as the Health Promotion Levy). This project was therefore a logical next step in terms of enabling the PRICELESS SA team to share their experiences and expertise with colleagues outside South Africa.

Gender implications:

The project team paid specific attention to gender considerations in their analysis of NCD policy content. Specifically, the team found that despite high-level policy commitments to gender mainstreaming across the seven study countries, gender was often neglected in specific policy documents such as national NCD prevention and control strategies. At the same time, the team found that there was a dearth of evidence on the gender burden of NCDs. On a positive note, interviews with key actors revealed a general sense that NCD policies should be gender-inclusive even though this remains to be seen in practice.

It is noteworthy that the project team had a very strong representation of women researchers. The PI Prof Karen Hofman and her core research team were all women including Safura Abdool Karim, Agnes Erzse, Petronell Kruger, Natasha Mazonde and Prof Anne-Marie Thow. Four of the seven emerging researchers were also women: Milkah Wajnohi (Kenya), Mulenga M. Mukanu (Zambia), Gemma Ahaibwe (Uganda), and Lebogang Gaogane (Botswana).

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

--- Page 1 ---

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Ntombizodwa Ndlovu &amp; Boyd Swinburn (2021) Readiness for sugar sweetened beverage taxation in sub-Saharan Africa, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1917801

Anne-Marie Thow, Agnes Erzse, Gershim Asiki, Charles Mulindabigwi Ruhara, Gemma Ahaibwe, Twalib Ngoma, Hans Justus Amukugo, Milka N. Wanjohi, Mulenga M. Mukanu, Lebogang Gaogane, Safura Abdool Karim &amp; Karen Hofman (2021) Study design: policy landscape analysis for sugar-sweetened beverage taxation in seven sub-Saharan African countries, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2020.1856469

Anne Marie Thow, Safura Abdool Karim, Mulenga M. Mukanu, Gemma Ahaibwe, Milka Wanjohi, Lebogang Gaogane, Hans Justus Amukugo, Charles Mulindabigwi Ruhara, Twalib Ngoma, Gershim Asiki, Agnes Erzse &amp; Karen Hofman (2021) The political economy of sugar-sweetened beverage taxation: an analysis from seven countries in sub-Saharan Africa, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1909267

Agnes Erzse, Safura Abdool Karim, Anne Marie Thow, Gemma Ahaibwe, Hans Justus Amukugo, Gershim Asiki, Lebogang Gaogane, Mulenga M. Mukanu, Twalib Ngoma, Charles Mulindabigwi Ruhara, Milkah N Wanjohi &amp; Karen Hofman (2021) The data availability landscape in seven sub-Saharan African countries and its role in strengthening sugar-sweetened beverage taxation, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2020.1871189

Safura Abdool Karim, Agnes Erzse, Anne-Marie Thow, Hans Justus Amukugo, Charles Ruhara, Gemma Ahaibwe, Gershim Asiki, Mulenga M. Mukanu, Twalib Ngoma, Milka Wanjohi, Abel Karera &amp; Karen Hofman (2021) The legal feasibility of adopting a sugar-sweetened beverage tax in seven sub-Saharan African countries, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1884358

Mulenga M. Mukanu, Safura Abdool Karim, Karen Hofman, Agnes Erzse &amp; Anne-Marie Thow (2021) Nutrition related non-communicable diseases and sugar sweetened beverage policies: a landscape analysis in Zambia, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1872172

Hans Justus Amukugo, Safura Abdool Karim, Anne Marie Thow, Agnes Erzse, Petronell Kruger, Abel Karera &amp; Karen Hofman (2021) Barriers to, and facilitators of, the adoption of a sugar sweetened beverage tax to prevent non-communicable diseases in Namibia: a policy landscape analysis, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1903213

Charles Mulindabigwi Ruhara, Safura Abdool Karim, Agnes Erzse, Anne-Marie Thow, Sylvere Ntirampeba &amp; Karen J Hofman (2021) Strengthening prevention of nutrition-related non-communicable diseases through sugar-sweetened beverages tax in Rwanda: a policy landscape analysis, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1883911

Milkah N Wanjohi, Ann Marie Thow, Safura Abdool Karim, Gershim Asiki, Agnes Erzse, Shukri F Mohamed, Hermann Pythagore Pierre Donfouet, Pamela A Juma &amp; Karen J Hofman (2021) Nutrition-related non-communicable disease and sugar-sweetened beverage policies: a landscape

--- Page 2 ---

analysis in Kenya, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1902659

Gemma Ahaibwe, Safura Abdool Karim, Anne-Marie Thow, Agnes Erzse &amp; Karen Hofman (2021)
Barriers to, and facilitators of, the adoption of a sugar sweetened beverage tax to prevent non-communicable diseases in Uganda: a policy landscape analysis, Global Health Action, 14:1, DOI: 10.1080/16549716.2021.1892307

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Project outputs were completed and of acceptable quality.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

This project sought to generate evidence to inform the adoption of fiscal and policy interventions for addressing NCDs and their associated risk factors in seven African countries namely Botswana, Kenya, Namibia, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. Specifically, the project aimed to assess data availability and quality on NCDs and associated modifiable risk factors; analyse the current policy landscape that would enable or challenge the prevention and control of NCDs; and describe the state of food industries that impact NCD burden (e.g. the sugar sweetened beverage industry). Collectively, this evidence was then to be used to develop recommendations on the most appropriate fiscal and policy interventions for NCD prevention in each study country. The findings of the project are as follows:

## NCD data is weak

Across the seven study countries, monitoring of NCD risk factors and their determinants was weak and often limited to large-scale household surveys such as Demographic and Health Surveys. Even so, these surveys did not adequately capture NCD risk factor indicators such as individual-level intake of unhealthy foods and beverages. Further, even where these indicators were available (e.g. through National STEPwise surveys), they tended to be outdated.

## NCDs are ignored outside of the health sector and in the media

NCDs were generally recognized in high-level policies such as national development plans, vision documents and nutrition/NCD strategies. This recognition was often accompanied by a call/mandate for multi-sectoral action on NCDs. However, this mandate was often not translated into sector-specific policies of non-health sectors such as agriculture and trade. Additional analysis of media coverage of NCDs showed that over a five-year period, there were only 35 media articles on SSB tax across the seven countries and a large portion of these articles related to South Africa's health promotion levy.

## Economic interests are at odds with NCD agendas

Conversations with policymakers and other key stakeholders revealed that industry actors (including the food and beverage industry) were framed as important to achieve economic growth and maintain employment opportunities, and there was generally high-level support for industry-led growth in

--- Page 3 ---

national development plans and other economic policy documents in all seven countries. Further analysis showed that industry actors publicly lobbied against SSB taxation (e.g. in Uganda reducing the tax and in Tanzania opposing increases) on the basis of the need to promote industry competitiveness.

Fiscal policies for NCD prevention are feasible

Across the seven study countries, the project found that there were no legal barriers to the adoption of fiscal policies such as SSB taxes. In fact, five countries already levied an excise tax on SSBs, either as a form of revenue generation or, in the case of Zambia, as a proposed public health measure. These existing taxes present an opportunity to advocate for the adoption of fiscal policies that both meet public health objectives and provide additional revenue to resource-constrained governments. However, to counter industry influence, the project recommends that NCD stakeholders need to: 1) shift the economic discourse e.g. by showing the economic impact of diagnosing and caring for people with NCDs; 2) forge links with other key non-health sectors such as agriculture sector in order to identify common policy objectives and benefits.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

There were no unintended outcomes of this project. However, initially the project had intended to collect beverage industry data on market share and consumption trends. However, the project team discovered that publicly available industry data was very limited in their respective countries.

Consequently, the project team got approval from the responsible officer (Sam Oti) to reallocate funds to get industry data from paid sources such as Euromonitor. They were able to access purchased data on beverage companies for all countries except Rwanda and this information was included in the policy analysis work package of the project.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

Investing in knowledge and innovation for large scale change:

This project contributed to a significant body of knowledge regarding the readiness of countries in Eastern and Southern Africa to adopt fiscal policies for NCD prevention. Its contribution to the evidence-base was impressive: 9 peer reviewed publications and 6 Op-Eds.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow:

The project supported 7 emerging researchers, 3 PhD students and 1 Masters student. Further, the project contributing to enhancing the visibility of the PRICELESS SA team as thought-leaders on the topic of fiscal policies for NCD prevention in Africa.

## Objectives

--- Page 4 ---

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: The aim of the project is to identify contextual factors (challenges and barriers) that shape NCD policies with the intent of providing evidence to inform the pursuit of fiscal and policy interventions for NCD prevention in the seven target countries.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1: To understand data availability and quality on NCDs and associated modifiable risk factors.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2: To analyse the current policy landscape that would enable or challenge the prevention and control of NCDs.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3: To describe the history and present state of the various industries in each setting (for example, beverage industry, sugar industry, trade barriers).

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 4: To develop national and international health policy research capacity in food-related NCD prevention.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 5: To utilize evidence generated from this study to develop recommendations on the most appropriate fiscal and policy interventions for NCD prevention in each participating country.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

--- Page 5 ---

No issues with financial performance of the project. A six month no cost extension was granted to compensate for work disruptions resulting from the impact of Covid-19 pandemic.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

No unanticipated risks affected this project other than the Covid-19 pandemic.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

All ethical approvals were obtained as planned.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

The project analyzed the non-communicable disease policy ecosystem in seven countries of eastern and southern Africa. I note exemplary south-south collaboration including with field thought leaders and local research capacity strengthening of the next generation of NCD scientists. The work identified challenges of inadequate data on NCDs, siloed approach to address NCDs, which is limited to the health sector, and prioritization of economic concerns over NCDs prevention. The work makes recommendations related to these challenges including the costing of management of NCDS. The project also highlights the lack of gender concerns in NCD policies including an important knowledge gap on the gender burden of NCDs. These gaps continue to inform ongoing work on healthy food systems. PCR approved by Kathryn Toure, IDRC Regional Director, Nairobi, 25 October 2022

## Action Items / Next Steps

N/A

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Director GH: John Dusabe-Richards

## Director CRFS: Santiago Alba Corral

## Regional Director ESARO: Kathryn Toure

## Global Health Team

--- Page 6 ---

Communications: Angela Baiya
VP PPB: Dominique Charron
VP SRP: Julie Shouldice
Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin
Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon
GAD: Anne-Marie Butuba, Andre Lavoie

## Notes
Any key documents can be included as an annex.
Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
