--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 109499 Supporting small and medium enterprises, food security, and evolving social protection mechanisms to deal with COVID-19 in Pakistan  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Arjan de Haan  |
|  Former Responsible Officer | Marco Rondon  |
|  Principal Investigator | Qasim Shah  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | Sustainable Development Policy Institute  |
|  Location: Country | Pakistan  |
|  Location: Region | Asia  |
|  Area of research impact | Pakistan  |
|  Internal Funding | $709,500.00d  |
|  External Funding |   |
|  Project Start Date | July 2020  |
|  Project Completion Date | July 2023  |
|  Program theme sector |   |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Arjan de Haan  |
|  Date of Report | 17 August, 2023  |
|  Project Abstract  |
| --- |
|  To prevent the spread of COVID-19 infections, Pakistan enforced a strict lockdown and quarantine system. This system, however, is negatively affecting many sectors of the economy, with a disproportionately high impact on the livelihoods of the most vulnerable. Among the most affected sectors are food production and disrupted food supply chains, where small and medium enterprises are facing massive layoffs or closures.  |
|  This project will provide evidence-based advice to the government of Pakistan to respond to the crisis, guide rapid policy responses, and develop measures to build resilience for the post-COVID period. It will generate and feed information to a national food security dashboard to facilitate the transportation of food commodities from surplus districts to deficit districts, contributing to food security. The project will also map formal and informal small and medium  |

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

enterprises (SMEs) in the country and provide evidence on the effectiveness of the current stimulus package to strengthen national SME policy.

In addition, given that existing social safety nets are insufficient to support the 60% of Pakistan's labour force working in informal undocumented sectors of the economy, there is an urgent need for an in-depth analysis of existing social protection mechanisms to devise a roadmap for a universal social protection regime in Pakistan. The project will help fill information and action gaps and serve as a bridge between policymakers and the needs of millions of daily wage earners in rural and urban areas, leading to positive impacts on the livelihoods of millions of vulnerable Pakistanis.

# PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Food Security Dashboard (FSDB): The Dashboard provides much needed stock information to the government to make decisions for movement of food commodities from surplus districts to deficient districts to avoid any crisis. SDPI, CSOs and development partners has been advocating for this, and COVID-19 provided an opportune moment. The SDPI ED presented the idea in the PM Economic Advisory Committee, where it was accepted. The Dashboard was of no avail unless data was entered on a daily basis, and availability of data was guaranteed through Food Security Information Flow Bill, which SDPI helped draft.

Input into Policy on Small &amp; Medium Enterprises: The President of the Pakistan and Prime Minister both appreciated SDPI support and input into the SME policy launched in 2021.

The project helped start a debate on the need and challenges associated with launch of Universal Social Protection in Pakistan. The SDPI ED has been nominated as Member Board of Governors of Pakistan's largest Social Protection Programme namely, Benazir Income Support Programme (BISP).

Moreover, owing to its research and outreach, SDPI has been invited to serve at the Resource Mobilization Commission, Convenor of Agriculture Transformation Plan, and member of National Food Security Committee. SDPI was the only private member requested to join National Coordination Committee on Agriculture, through which SDPI supported the government's roadmap for agriculture sector revival amid Covid 19.

# RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

The project had three main themes, and also responded to the enormous 2022 flood:

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

On the flood: “Floods in Pakistan Rethinking the humanitarian role, Research Paper, SDPI”, https://sdpi.org/floods-in-pakistan-rethinking-the-humanitarian-role-english/publication_detail

On food security:

“Impact of Agriculture Stimulus Package on Agriculture”, MNFSR, MoF &amp; SDPI, Report

“Kissan Card Scheme to be extended”, Express Tribune, Jan. 2022.

https://www.ids.ac.uk/publications/strengthening-food-security-in-pakistan-during-the-covid-19-pandemic/

ON SMEs: “Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Amid Covid in Pakistan”, Report by Ahmed et al.

Damage Need Assessment of MSMEs in Pakistan during the COVID-19, published by SDPI newsletter and other news papers https://sdpi.org/sdconference/Beyond-the-Pandemic-Leaving-No-One-Behind/pr-sdpis-sustainable-development-conference-day-3rd/press-release-details

On Social Protection: Universal Social Protection-2030, report by Sajid Amin Javed &amp; Syed Mustafa.

The extensive set of outreach activities (25+) and media coverage is detailed in the technical report.

SDPI_CORE_Final_Tech_Report_17Aug.docx

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality. Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

n/a

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area? Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

In each of the three areas of focus, based on SDPIs reputation and existing relationships, the project directly informed policy making: through the promotion of the dashboard for food security, analysis of support to SMEs, and contribution to debates on social protection. The contribution in each area was recognised by government partners, and the dashboard in particular – the earliest and strongest strand of work – had contributed to the improvement of the country's food security policies.

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

Given that this project was started at the beginning of the pandemic, I would argue the results - at least in the area of food security - exceeded expectations. There were no unintended outcomes. The results were enabled by SDPIs reputation and existing links with policy makers. The team incorporated work on newly emerging related challenges, particularly the devastating floods.

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic/core objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project was developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project was part of the CORE cohort, the $25 million IDRC investment in early FY 202021 in response to the pandemic. This had the strategic objective to enable national think tanks to address key emerging issues. The work by SDPI clearly contributed to this objective: the choice of themes (and the work on food security of course very much in line with continued CRFS objectives), quality of work and outreach, and how the validation of contributions by senior officials all show the alignment of the project with IDRC objectives. SDPI also actively contributed to the CORE-wide Knowledge Translation activities and objectives.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To generate research-based evidence to support the Government of Pakistan in its efforts to minimize the impact of the COVID pandemic on small and medium enterprises, food security and the livelihoods of the most vulnerable, while strengthening the national social protection programs to respond effectively in post-crisis COVID period. to enter text.

4 Fully met ☐X 3 ☐2 ☐1 Not met

Comment: While the work on food security arguably overachieved objectives, the social protection strand did not seem to have yielded such strong results.

Specific Objective 1: Contribute to food security by creating a dash board and policy recommendations for coordinating the supply and demand of essential food commodities across the country.

☐X 4 Fully met ☐3 ☐2 ☐1 Not met

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Comment:.

Specific Objective 2: To map and assess government response measures set-up to mitigate the impacts of the COVID pandemic, including fiscal and monetary policy measures, particularly their effectiveness in supporting small and medium enterprises

☐ 4 Fully met
☐ X 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 3: Identify key challenges faced by the current social protection system in reaching to the most vulnerable and recommend a feasible pathway towards an evidence based universal protection system.

☐ 4 Fully met
☐ X 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

## FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC’s administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

No major financial issues have arisen. The accounting for exchange rate fluctuations and changes in activities required some back-an-forth.

## STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

The need to respond to a rapidly changing context was highlighted as bringing uncertainty in project implementation; this was expected mitigated by the strength of the implementing organization, who in fact integrated new challenges into project implementation.

Political receptivity for project results: this continued to be high.

Pakistan’s social and geopolitical instabilities did not impact the project.

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

No research ethics issues emerged, and SDPI applied the existing institutional practices including measures to mitigate the pandemic risks.

## Program Leader / Manager comments

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

This PCR presents the relevance of the IDRC response to the COVID-19 crisis. One key idea about the importance and success of this project is that it directly informed policymaking in Pakistan in the areas of food security, small and medium enterprises, and social protection. The project's contribution in each area was recognized by government partners, and the food security dashboard, in particular, had contributed to the improvement of the country's food security policies. Moreover, the project helped start a debate on the need and challenges associated with launching a universal social protection system in Pakistan.

The PO's recommendations in this PCR helps us to understand how to bridge the gap between policymakers and the needs of millions of vulnerable Pakistanis, positively impacting their livelihoods. Overall, as per its design, the project's success resided in its ability to involve and provide evidence-based advice to Pakistan's government to respond to the COVID-19 crisis and develop measures to build resilience for the post-COVID period.

I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
