--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

The project developed and demonstrated potency of CCPP vaccines based on the fast-growing Mycoplasma capricolum subsp. capricolum (Mcc) antigens in a new adjuvant (ISA61VG). The vaccine was able to confer protection against contagious caprine pleuropneumonia (CCPP) in goats.

Development of regional heartwater vaccines using a cocktail of local strains was demonstrated. The resulting vaccine did not show protection though. However, the principle shows technical feasibility of curating regional vaccines and addressing the strain specificity challenge of Heartwater vaccines.

The team showed that Heartwater and CCPP could be combined and co-administered with a classical PPR vaccine. This does not interfere with either PPR protection or CCPP protection. This potentially bring to the field the possibility of delivering three vaccines at the same time which makes vaccine delivery cheaper.

The project team is already in discussion with Jovac (Jordan) as a potential vaccine manufacturer for the CCPP vaccine. They are interested in using the Mcc strain and have signed a Non Disclosure Agreement with the team towards collaboration.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

There were no publications during the project although some draft manuscripts were ready.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The team did not publish during the project due to delays in completing key animal trials. This in turn was due to the COVID 19 pandemic laboratory lockdowns. They plan to publish research articles to present project outputs following IDRC's open access policy. This will include:

- Genetic diversity of ER strains in West Africa;
- Use of Mcc inactivated vaccines for protection against CCPP and compatibility with classical PPR vaccines,
- Local inactivated ER cocktail vaccines for protection against heartwater,
- Thermostability of inactivated antigens in Montanide oil emulsion and Quality control of antigen stability using MS,

--- Page 1 ---

Identification of biomarkers correlating with successful CCPP vaccination.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Heartwater and Contagious Caprine Pleuropneumonia (CCPP) are two diseases that constitute major threats to small ruminant (grazing animals such as goats and sheep) production in developing countries, notably in Africa. Although commercial vaccines are currently available, they present so many limitations that vaccination is hardly ever implemented in the field. Combined vaccines will reduce the cost of vaccination, resulting in healthier goats and reduced overall mortality. This will also increase the accessibility of vaccines to goat farmers (who are often women), children, and marginalized communities in developing countries.

The Mycoplasma Capricolum subsp capricolum (Mcc) antigen-based vaccine is cheaper to produce because it grows much faster than the Mycoplasma Capricolum subsp capripneumoniae (Mccp) strain currently used for commercial vaccines.

The new challenge model revolutionises the way candidate vaccines are tested. Previously, such trials depended on vaccinated animals being kept in contact with artificially infected ones (in-contact model). This resulted in variable results. The new model uses aerosolised challenge material that is administered directly to the vaccinated animals making this much more consistent, repeatable and therefore utilises fewer animals.

The capacity to collect, characterise and use local Heartwater isolates is important in formulating cocktail vaccines. This will address the current challenge of vaccine failure due to poor matching as the immunity is strain specific. The high parasite genetic diversity in the field renders vaccination ineffective.

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

For the Heartwater vaccine, the outcomes were achieved except field trial in which the difference between vaccinated group and control was not statistically significant. This field trail could have failed due to several factors among which the team proposes inability to predict antigenicity using molecular tools during characterisation of collected filed strains.

The outcomes for the CCPP vaccine were achieved to a very high degree. The new formulation contains a fast-growing strain and this is now able to be formulated in an oil based adjuvant.

Several objectives were added after project commencement that were successfully achieved. This makes this project a high value one. These include: 1) development and implementation of a new challenge model at KALRO the CCPP challenge model to ensure repeatability of results and support sustainability of CCPP vaccine research; 2) validation of the AmpliSeq technology for sequencing of Heartwater strains directly from ticks; and 3) Awareness and diagnostic capacity of CCPP in West

--- Page 2 ---

Africa was increased.

The IDRC Animal Health team organised wrap-around support for this project. This involved training the research team in market development and intellectual asset management by a consultant (Wellspring Development Capital Ltd). The feedback from the team was very positive and several teams expressed a request for project specific support to enable them to implement their projects in an accelerated and market facing manner. The acquired knowledge helped this team identify product development partners e.g., Jovac (a private sector manufacturer based in Jordan) and PANVAC, (the Pan African Veterinary Vaccine Centre of the African Union).

Towards the end of the project, outstanding works were smoothly transitioned into collaboration with another EU funded project working on Heartwater called Multivalent inactivated vaccine against heartwater in Africa (MuhVA - Project UE-Leap-Agri). The last steering committee meeting was a joint meeting between the two projects' leading scientists. The project leveraged Euro 870,000 from that project to support the transition. Additionally, they were encouraged to collaborate with TAHSSL, another animal health platform at ILRI. In this regard, CIRAD is collaborating with TAHSSL on two proposals coordinated by ILRI, one on standardisation of the CCPP challenge model developed by ILRI and used in MultiVacc trials, and another on quality control of the classical CCPP vaccine based on Mccp antigens in saponin.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change

CCPP and heartwater are important diseases afflicting small ruminants in Africa which are mainly reared and traded by women. Their control using results of this project will contribute to food security and improve livelihoods among the smallholder livestock farming communities.

Although heartwater and CCPP may be treated with antibiotics, uncontrolled use of antimicrobials may contribute to the development of multidrug resistance, so prophylactic vaccination is the preferred strategy for the control of these diseases. The results of this research will not only contribute to better cost-effective CCPP prevention but also address the emergence of AMR.

The validation of using a new oil adjuvant will make the concomitant production of CCPP with other oil adjuvanted vaccines feasible. This will lead to cheaper vaccine delivery systems for smallholder livestock farmers.

Use of fast-growing CCPP strain (Mcc) will result in lower vaccine production cost. Cheaper vaccine translates into more availability and access for small scale producers.

Build the leaders for today and tomorrow

The project was an opportunity for female scientists both at senior and middle career level to develop skills in their respective fields. The three research teams comprised - CIRAD: 5 female 1 male;

--- Page 3 ---

CIRDES: 1 female 2 male; KALRO: 2 female 3 male.

Three Masters students were supported by the project. These are Emilie Kouadjane (Université Felix Houphouet Boigny, Ivory coast), Tidjani Djiman, (Université d'Abomey -Calavi, Benin), Bosir Ouattara (Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, Burkina Faso).

A one-month training course on heartwater serological and molecular methods was organised by CIRAD-Guadeloupe in June 2018 for two project members from LABOCEL (Niger) and KALRO (Kenya).

Several visits by scientists from CIRAD (France) to ILRI and KALRO resulted in Heartwater and Mycoplasma vaccines knowledge and skills exchange among the teams.

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: Click here to enter text.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

Due to the unplanned for COVID pandemic, the project had to be supplemented and extended. It received 6 months and a supplementary budget of CAD 88,000. Due to COVID travel restriction delays, the project could not hold a physical steering committee meeting. They requested to spend upfront (travel and accommodation) and then hold the meeting post-project, but this was administratively not a

--- Page 4 ---

feasible option for IDRC. A virtual one was held instead.

An internal audit was commissioned for KALRO for inadmissible expenditure. This was detected by the responsible PO when a budget line for hay for 80 goats seems rather too high. Investigations resulted in discovering that several expenses not related to hay had been incurred and posted to this budget line. Some of these were inadmissible and KALRO was requested to remove them from the financial report. The audit took place during COVID lockdowns and resulted in several months of delays due to the back-and-forth nature of financial documentation that had to be assembled and sent to GAD. The main lesson was to be vigilant and demand copies of financial documents when irregularities are detected by the responsible PO.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

One animal trial (Heartwater vaccine trial in controlled conditions) in France was not completed due to shutting down of labs in France. This risk was due to COVID related lockdowns in 2021 and had not been anticipated in the PAD. The trial had to be terminated as the time for challenging the animals had passed by almost a year by the time the labs reopened.

Tick DNA samples from Kenya could not be shipped to Burkina Faso for further molecular characterisation due to restrictive Nagoya protocols. This risk had not been anticipated. Going forward, project involving international sharing of biological samples should have this risk considered and properly factored into the project design. Local sample processing should be encouraged through integration of capacity strengthening of local laboratories on project designs. Alternatively, local partnerships with labs that have appropriate sample processing capacity should be identified.

The project experienced an unprecedented loss of goats (83/49) for the CCPP trials. This was attributed to an outbreak of CCPP confirmed by CIRAD. The mitigation was to stop buying goats from areas whose CCPP status was unknown and to source from the ILRI closed herd.

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

The ethics committee in Guadeloupe was dissolved during the project. This resulted in delays for setting up the Heartwater trial as the team waited for a replacement committee.

The first Heartwater challenge in cattle was very virulent, and the team had to treat the animals with antibiotics. This disturbed the results somewhat, but the team did the right thing in following ethics recommendation (above focus on data) and treating the animals before the planned termination of the trial.

## Program Leader comments

--- Page 5 ---

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

IDRC's on-going commitment to support the development of new livestock vaccines and alternatives to antibiotics is critical for farmers' livelihoods and the development of more sustainable climate resilient food systems in Africa. CCPP and heartwater are major diseases impacting small ruminant production in Africa, animals which are typically raised and sold by women. This project was selected from the second call of the LVIF (i.e., Call 2/midstream projects), which supported projects to improve current vaccines including those involving innovative ways of producing vaccines, and which would have capacity for large scale adoption in the LVIF target countries.

I agree with Victor's analysis that the project was successful and met its key objectives. The project was significantly impacted by COVID-19 shut-downs and Victor is to be commended for the effort he has put into delivering this project. Some excellent fundamental research was conducted in this project (e.g., development of new challenge models). It is exciting to know that a promising new CCPP vaccine candidate has been developed and that discussions are underway with Jovac about manufacturing. The LVIF team is now conducting additional product development support to map out next steps for this vaccine and others in the pipeline. The economic importance of the disease to farmers is clear, and so a successful vaccine would have considerable potential to commercialise across a range of markets across Africa. Kudos also to Victor and GAD colleagues for the due-diligence shown in coordinating the audit of KALRO. This audit has been used as an example of IDRC financial procedures when discussing new partnerships. Lessons have been integrated into on-going LVIF and InnoVet-AMR projects (e.g., additional random sampling of receipts each financial period).

I would encourage Victor to further share with PPB, SRP, and RB (and others) colleagues at IDRC some of the most innovative lessons learned during the management and support of the project (e.g., IP assessments/risks/recommendations, market assessments, regulatory considerations, material transfer, etc). It is crucial that future projects learn from this (and similar ones) on how to identify these risks and mitigate them during the whole program cycle. Especially as IDRC moves forward with its Private Sector Engagement strategy as part of Strategy 2030.

Kevin Tiessen

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Director of CRFS

--- Page 6 ---

CRFS Program team

ESARO staff

VP PPB: Dominique Charron

VP SRP: Julie Shouldice

Executive Assistant to VP PBB: Ida St-Martin

Executive Assistant to VP SRP: Geneviève Gagnon

Regional Directors – ESARO

GAD: Helen St-Martin and her GAD Manager

Private sector engagement colleagues (2) in SRP

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
