--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

The project successfully trained 25 M. Sc. Students on the water and policy program. Thirteen of them are women. This is the first program in India offering an interdisciplinary academic and research training on water and with a distinct focus on the policy interface.

Several of the students generated reviewed article publications and presented at scientific national and international conferences.

The program also trained, via short courses on specific topics on water and policy, a number of water professionals from leading NGOs and relevant government agencies involved in water management in various India states.

Project researchers, all professors from Shiv Nadar University (SNU) published extensively on water and society issues and were featured repeatedly in national media.

Some of the faculty associated to the project were appointed to high level commissions on water policy in India. Dr. Mihir Shah, Distinguished Professor, Shiv Nadar University chaired the Committee to draft the new National Water Policy set up by the Ministry of Jal Shakti in 2019. He wrote a series of five articles on New National Water Policy.

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Final technical report

Water Series Bulletin (12 Issues)

Announcement for the M.Sc. program on Water and Policy

Students M.Sc. Dissertation with titles

Sample of Student Publications:

Carbon policy for the farm.pdf

Green investment for sustainable agriculture: A missed opportunity.pdf

Plundering Ground Water in Punjab.pdf

Selected Publications by project research staff

--- Page 1 ---

Mihir Shah. September 20, 2021 “A new water policy for India”, Business Standard, @ https://www.business-standard.com/article/opinion/a-new-water-policy-for-india-121092001544_1.html
Mihir Shah
October 20, 2021 “Water governance reform”, Business Standard, @
https://www.business-standard.com/article/opinion/water-governance-reform-121102001564_1.html

Mihir Shah, January 2022. Thematic Essay, ‘Dismantling Barriers to Upscaling Agro-ecological Farming in India’, Ecology, Economy and Society, 5 (1), January 2022, @ https://ecoinsee.org/journal/ojs/index.php/ees/article/view/618

Kulkarni H., Joshi D., Aslekar U., Patil S. (2021) Catalysing Groundwater Governance Through People's Participation and Institutional Reform. In: Chadha G., Pandya A.B. (eds) Water Governance and Management in India. Water Resources Development and Management. Springer, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-1472-9_1.

Rajeswari S. Raina and Keshab Das 2021. Whither Rural India? The Developmental State and Labour at the Margins, in Padmini Swaminathan and Uma Rani (Ed.s) State Capital Nexus: Implications for Labour, Anveshi Broadsheet on Contemporary Politics, March 2021, pp.9-12. (https://www.anveshi.org.in/broadsheet-on-contemporary-politics/broadsheet-pdfs-english-and-telugu/).

Kulkarni, H., Bhave, N., Upasani, D. and Gupta, R. (2022) Aquifers: forging the convergence between groundwater and communities in the heterogeneous groundwater systems of Western and Central India. Journal Geological Society of India. ...

Conferences

Manikanta P. Radhakrishna, (graduated in May 2022) presented his research thesis work at International Water Resources Association's 17th World Water Congress at Daegu City of the Republic of Korea, November 29 - Dec 3, 2021. 'Managing Water Scarcity: Integration of Supply- and Demand-side Options in Kaveri River Basin'.

J. Catherine and Tenzing Saldon (graduated in 2021) presented a paper at the international conference on "Environmental Justice, Ecological Economics and Water Infrastructure in Northeast India: Hydropower and Waterways" in Guwahati, March 2-4, 2019.

Dr. Rajeswari Raina. Invited Lecture: "Holding Out Against the Global Fundamentals of Growth: Knowledge and Technology in Asia's Agri-food systems" Seminar paper presented online at the Seminar on Technological Globalization from Below, organized by CEPED, Universite de Paris, Paris, 23rd February 2022.

Dr. Mihir Shah, Keynote Address, ‘Transforming Soil Imagination for Sustainable Prosperity’, World Soil Day, Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH on December 6, 2021. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M4xrXN4sjbM

Dr. Himanshu Kulkarni. Keynote address: 'Plurality of Trajectories - Concepts, Approaches and Strategies from Community Management to Local Groundwater Governance', as part of the theme Plurality of Postures and Approaches to Support Concerted Local Governance of Groundwater. UNESCO International Conference on Groundwater, Key to Sustainable Development Goals, 18-20 May 2022.

--- Page 2 ---

Guest Lecture Series

Trivializing Intimacy, Objectifying Entwinement: Rethinking Water, Land and 'Culture' in Bangladesh' by Prof. Swadhin Sen, Department of Archaeology, Jahangirnagar University, Bangladesh.

Groundwater arsenic-contamination in West Bengal, India: magnitude, distribution, health effects, food chain contamination, and remedial measurements. By Dr. Tarit Roychowdhury, School of Environmental Studies, Jadavpur University, Kolkata.

Water Worlds: Vijayanagara Landscapes And Change

Professor Kathleen Morrison, Sally and Alvin V Shoemaker Professor of Anthropology, University of Pennsylvania

Wetland Restoration and Management - Case of Vembanad Wetland'

Dr. Jojo T.D., Coordinator, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment (ATREE)

Student testimonials

Laxmi Sharma, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MntBcSqqNic

Sahil Mathew - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hAfP869oeFo

Nidhi Sehrawat - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b0puo6lZUL4

Anirudh Kishore - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gFyKqrgJQLM

Students Internship Reports: Student Summer Internship Summary Report.zip

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

## Objectives

--- Page 3 ---

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To develop a sustainable Water Science and Policy Program to create a cadre and network of professionals in India with a contextualized, multi-disciplinary understanding of water.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1: To train MSc students and mid-career civil servants in water science and policy

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 2:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

--- Page 4 ---

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Finding solutions to the persistent and complex problems of water management requires, by its own nature, the use of transdisciplinary approaches. However, the traditional academic programs on water offered by universities, usually are not able to provide the necessary level of transdisciplinary. In that regard, this project was innovative given that its main objective was to provide training for a new cohort of water professionals that, through the M.Sc. program, acquire such expertise by learning water-related scientific theory and practices.

I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral

Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
