--- Page 0 ---

# Project Highlights

What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

# Research Outputs

List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

All the outputs are available on open access basis. By the project closing date, the research team was in the process of preparing manuscripts for peer reviewed publications which will be made available as open access when published.

If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## Project Outcomes

How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The project evolved as planned with the goal of investigating the policies and practices affecting the food system, and to bring to the fore the voices, experiences, and priorities of marginalised actors in the food system.

Due to the continued disruptions to field work longer than what was anticipated at the beginning of the project, the research team adjusted their data collection methods. However, this did not have negative impacts on the research because the project was able to successfully collect all the necessary data and made significant knowledge contribution.

How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

--- Page 1 ---

## Objectives

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 1: To monitor and analyze regulatory and support responses to COVID-19 as they relate to the food system.

4 Fully met 3

Specific Objective 2: collect and analyze real-time qualitative and quantitative data on the impacts on different elements of food systems and the livelihoods of food system actors, with a focus on women and marginalized actors.

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 4:

4 Fully met 3 2 1 Not met

Comment:

## Financial performance

Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

From the financial analysis at the end of the project there was an unspent amount to be returned to IDRC which GAD is following up in communication with the recipient's finance team.

## Strategic Considerations

Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional

--- Page 2 ---

and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

The PLAAS initiative was a very timely and needed project that allows IDRC and our partners to better understand the impact of COVID and the measures to control the pandemic had on the Food Systems. As discussed in this PCR, the grantee was able to implement a series of rigorous studies despite the operational constraints created by COVID-19.

The results of this project contributed to IDRC's understanding of programming in emergency situations and provided a unique set of data that will inform the implementation of the climate resilient food systems program outcome.

## I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral

Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

## Notes

Any key documents can be included as an annex.

Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
