--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 109965 Promoting Intersectional Development Research  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Arjan de Haan  |
|  Former Responsible Officer |   |
|  Principal Investigator | Hannah Dawson, Siviwe Mhlane  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | Southern Centre for Inequality Studies (SCIS), Wits University  |
|  Location: Country | South Africa  |
|  Location: Region | Africa  |
|  Area of research impact | Global  |
|  Internal Funding | CAD 377,842  |
|  External Funding | -  |
|  Project Start Date | January 2023  |
|  Project Completion Date | October 2024  |
|  Program theme sector |   |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Arjan de Haan  |
|  Date of Report |   |

## Project Abstract

This project will contribute to the understanding of, and inform and promote intersectional approaches to development research. Through collaborative partnerships with researchers based in the Global South, the project will produce 6-8 case studies that document the diverse application of an intersectional research approach. The project will also develop a synthesis report that summarises the benefits, limitations and barriers of incorporating an intersectional approach and a practical guide on how to put intersectionality into practice in development research, and inform policy. The project will be led by the Southern Centre for Inequality Studies at the University of Witwatersrand.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

This project provided unique insights into existing practices of intersection development research. A non-exhaustive but targeted search through IDRC projects that were deemed to be gender-transformative showed limited application of a clear intersection lens, and different interpretations of definitions.

Based on recently finished IDRC-supported research across sectors, the project produced eight case studies that were peer reviewed and published on the lead organisation's website (see links below) following presentations in international forums.

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

These provide very important insights into the practices of local feminist research, for IDRC and the research community more broadly.

The lead organisation has drawn out lessons from the case studies and the process of commissioning and supporting these in a synthesis report. This highlights that the intersectionality concepts continues to lack an agreed definition, and the importance of investigating its application in specific research contexts and practical applications. The project leads are now turning this into a peer reviewed article which promises to be an important contribution to the practices of development research.

For IDRC, this project proved to be timely, as it managed to inform ongoing discussion and on our GEI framework, as well as discussions on decolonisation. IDRC GEI leads participated at various points in discussions (for example around the June 2024 webinar, recommendations for GEI framework), and POs across IDRC programs helped inform the design of the study, and findings thus informed our thinking during project implementation.

It may be worth highlighting here the "recommendations for IDRC", that conclude emphasising to "consider developing principles for integration throughout the grant-making cycle that emphasise local context, flexibility and a commitment to addressing systematic inequalities". First, operationalising intersectionality in development research is challenging: it is more of a lens than a rigid approach, there is no one-size-fits-all approach and integration into international organisations carries the risk of reducing it to a check box. Practical guidance and capacity building are crucial, but IDRC must navigate a nuanced approach, balancing experimentation with caution to prevent misinterpretation, and collaborating with global South partners. Deepening IDRC engagement should include: 1) striving for clear definitions and consistent use of the term intersectionality while recognising the diversity in how it is defined, adopted and applied; 2) work with partners to incorporate intersectionality into existing tools and frameworks; 3) develop subject-specific, programme-aligned and context-appropriate resources to build research capacity, safeguard against a formulaic approach, and amplify southern perspectives and establish peer learning opportunities; 4) in grant-making practices resist the uncritical adoption of intersectionality and scrutinise its implications for internal processes and power dynamics.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Synthesis report: https://www.wits.ac.za/scis/research-projects/intersectionality-project-/case-studies/.

Eight case studies, published on the SCIS website in January 2024:

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

https://www.wits.ac.za/scis/research-projects/intersectionality-project-/case-studies/

## Presentations and workshops:

- Panel on “Interrogating Intersectionality” at the IHD Global Conclave in January 2024, with four of the case studies represented at the conference across the key thematic
- Presentation at IDRC Fireside Discussion on Intersectionality and Inclusion, January 2024
- Virtual learning series between April and June 2024 with case study authors, researchers and practitioners from the global South.
- Session 1: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JMDAI9qPJDs
- Session 2: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMgMUrzMYMc
- 16-17 October 2024, SCIS hosted the Promoting Intersectional Development Research Hybrid Workshop, with IDRC participation.

## 3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The project was completed as expected. An extension was provided to the project, partly because of the change in lead researcher at Wits, but this proved an important opportunity for IDRC colleagues to engage with the project.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

## 4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Key findings are narrated above, and in terms of contribution I would highlight two aspects. First, the partners that wrote the case stories repeatedly expressed how important the project was, as it gave them the opportunity to reflect on their research methodologies, including the critical discussion about the concept of intersectionality (as mentioned above), and discuss this with a group of peers. It is likely that the reflections about these discussions will prove useful for a broader community of researchers.

Second, the contribution to the IDRC GEI discussions was described above, and this was made possible by the direct engagement of IDRC colleagues, and presentations to an IDRC wide audience. There are very clear recommendations to IDRC on the 'how' to deepen work on intersectionality, as a lens.

## 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

While the final results met expectations, the project objectives somewhat underestimated the challenges to promote an intersectional approach. First, the (explicit)

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

application in IDRC projects was less common than assumed; with support of IDRC POs and continued efforts of the project lead the project overcame this challenge. Second, there was more discussion about the value of the concept (particularly its Northern origin) than expected, and these discussions have crucially informed the project conclusions and particularly recommendations for donors.

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC’s strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

As mentioned, this project directly informed the ongoing development of our GEI framework and practices. This continues to be a priority for IDRC, as highlighted for example in discussions on the (interpretation of the) gender marker and use of the term inclusion as well as intersectionality.

Through this continued discussion, and the project results, IDRC not only continues to improve its own practices, but can also contribute to global leadership in supporting international development research. For this, IDRC might consider whether the findings and particularly recommendations for funders can be shared more broadly with our community of peers (eg Transforming Evidence Funders Network TEFN).

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives
On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: to understand, inform and promote intersectional approaches to development research across different program initiatives of the IDRC

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text

1. Specific Objective 1: Document the diverse application of an intersectional research approach in IDRC-funded research initiatives and beyond.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Specific Objective 2: Synthesise the lessons on the benefits, limits and barriers of incorporating an intersectional approach to research and identify opportunities for applying intersectional approaches to research dissemination, policy application and engagement.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text

Specific Objective 3: Provide a practical guide on putting intersectionality into practice in development research (and policy).

☐ 4 Fully met
☑ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text

Specific Objective 4: Identify the needs for strengthening capacity, among IDRC staff and partners, to sharpen our thinking on intersectionality as a concept and research paradigm while also contributing to the mainstreaming of an intersectional research approach.

☐ 4 Fully met
☑ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The preparation phase was somewhat long. A partner was selected for this work after acceptance of concept note under Forward Planning. But this helped greatly to shape the project in a way that aligned with IDRC interests and priorities.

An extension was agreed, both because of a change in project leadership, and the desire to allocate more time to distribution of findings. This proved useful for IDRC as it gave us an opportunity to engage in and contribute to the learning. The project has a small underspent.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

This project had no major risks. As mentioned, selecting the case studies proved more difficult than expected, but the process and discussions around the selection contributed greatly to the learning.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

As there was no primary research in this project, no significant research ethics existed. In the conclusions of the project, about the type of research methods that facilitates an intersectional approach, there are perhaps relevant lessons for our thinking about research ethics (and in any case the legitimacy of research we support).

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

## Director comments - Erin Tansey

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

The results of this project have exceeded expectations. The innovative approach taken led to significant advancements in the Centre's thinking on and understanding of intersectionality in a research context. The project highlighted the need for clearer definitions and consistent use of them across our work. The eight case studies produced provided valuable insights into local feminist research practices. These case studies were peer-reviewed and published, contributing significantly to the research community.

Along with the Synthesis Report, the project created a practical guide on how to implement intersectionality in development research and policy, offering crucial guidance for researchers and policymakers. The project identified the need for capacity building and provided recommendations for integrating intersectionality throughout the grant-making cycle. This includes emphasizing local context, flexibility and a commitment to addressing systemic inequalities.

These findings have been instrumental in informing ongoing discussions and practices within IDRC, particularly regarding the Gender Equality and Inclusion Programming Framework (GEIPF) and decolonization efforts.

Bravo on an excellent project!

Erin Tansey, Director Sustainable Inclusive Economies Division, January 21, 2025

## Action Items / Next Steps

Last revised, January 2025

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

- The Synthesis Report and practical guidelines should be added to the GEI Programming Framework 2.0
- The various recordings from sessions on intersectionality should be added to the GEI Learning Hub / Repository

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

In addition to the above, please share with:

- Vice President, Strategy, Regions and Policy
- all Program Directors,
- all Regional Directors,
- Director of POEV
- PPB Gender Advisor

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

Last revised, January 2025
