--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 110312 Final Dissemination & Close Out Event for LVIF projects at International Veterinary Immunology Symposium IVIS 2023  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Lizzie Chesang'  |
|  Former Responsible Officer |   |
|  Principal Investigator | Prof Salome Bukachi  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | University of Nairobi  |
|  Location: Country | Kenya, South Africa  |
|  Location: Region | Sub Saharan Africa  |
|  Area of research impact | Sub Saharan Africa  |
|  Internal Funding | IDRC  |
|  External Funding | The Gates Foundation and Global Affairs Canada  |
|  Project Start Date | September 2023  |
|  Project Completion Date | November 2023  |
|  Program theme sector | CRFS - Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF)  |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Sofia Jomo  |
|  Date of Report | July 7th 2025  |

## Project Abstract

The Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF) supports the development of affordable livestock vaccines, targeting diseases that impact women and men livestock smallholders, and facilitates their access and use at scale.

The LVIF Final Learning Event was a 1-day event taking place in parallel with international veterinary immunological symposium (IVIS) (https://ivis2023.org/). The IVIS is one of the largest veterinary immunological symposiums to advance immunological research on veterinary diseases. The conference took place in Kruger Park, South Africa from 17 November 2023 to 21 November 2023. The symposium was an opportunity for all veterinary immunologists from the global community to meet, engage, and learn from one another.

This project supported the final dissemination of results for the LVIF program at IVIS in Kruger Park via a conference side event on the 21st of November. The purpose of this event was to disseminate and showcase the findings of the research projects to internal and external attendees, including relevant attendees of IVIS that reached approximately 260 participants. This event facilitated knowledge exchange, collaboration, and reflection amongst the researchers, IDRC staff, and external participants through presentations, panel discussions, networking, and dialogue activities. Additionally, this project provided sponsorship to the IVIS conference to support a panel discussion organized by LVIF open to the wider conference. The panel showcased selected LVIF research.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

The LVIF Final Learning Event brought together over 30 participants drawn from the following countries: Kenya, Australia, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Ghana, Sri Lanka, Canada, South Africa, Mauritius, Morocco, Zambia, USA, Switzerland, and the U.K.

The main objective of the final event was to provide an opportunity for members of various LVIF projects to highlight key successes, challenges and lessons learnt to the LVIF cohort of projects. In addition, specific objectives included:

- To share lessons from the Women Empowerment and Gender project – delivery of vaccines
- To share lessons from vaccine development of various livestock diseases in LMICs
- To discuss lessons around the Regulatory matters and the Nagoya Treaty
- To provide feedback on the overall 8-year LVIF program and suggestions for the future

The participants engaged in and contributed to knowledge sharing about the LVIF program. This engagement was useful as the participants shared information on what went well regarding the LVIF program, what could be improved, and the considerations that IDRC should pay attention to in the future when designing similar programs. These considerations included the following:

- IDRC should include product process development and scaling up of successful research projects
- Provide training on product development
- There should be more involvement with the private laboratories and research organizations
- Environmental aspects of the end product and manufacturer responsibility
- Social factors of product development (behavioral risk factors)
- Set realistic timelines for projects
- There is needed flexibility in contract negotiations
- Inter-lab exchange learning programs for research managers
- Conducting costing of products

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

## 2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

This was a research support project (RSP) so there are no typical research project outputs. However, the LVIF Final Learning Event brought together over 30 participants drawn from the following countries: Kenya, Australia, Ethiopia, Vietnam, Ghana, Sri Lanka, Canada, South Africa, Mauritius, Morocco, Zambia, USA, Switzerland, and the U.K. These participants engaged in and contributed knowledge sharing about the LVIF program.

Here is the LVIF Final Event Report - Final ELEA Africa.docx.

In addition, within the International veterinary immunological symposium (IVIS) (https://ivis2023.org/), a two hour and thirty minutes panel discussion was organized, featuring representatives from four chosen Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF) projects.

The title of the panel was: From the bench to the Market; Livestock Vaccine Development in and for Law and middle-income countries (LMIC).

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

This RSP was important to fund due to its significant contribution to knowledge sharing. The LVIF grantees shared with each other successes, lessons, learnt, gaps, and bottlenecks with regards to Livestock Vaccine work in Africa, South Asia, and Southeast Asia where LVIF had been funding interventions. LVIF grantees also shared information that may be useful in improving IDRC programming and the design of similar programs in the future (some of these lessons are shared in section 1 of this report and others can be found from page 23-24 of the [LVIF Final Event Report - Final ELEA Africa.docx]).

5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The RSP achieved its intended results.

6. How did this project contribute one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the Strategic Plan. Provide specific numbers where possible.

This RSP primarily supported IDRC's strategic objective to share knowledge to inform local and global action. Dissemination of results at the symposium, which included many researchers and stakeholders from the target countries of the LVIF projects, presented a high potential for knowledge and experience sharing.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

### Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To share the findings of the LVIF projects with an international community of scholars and stakeholders engaged in veterinary immunology

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: Bring the principal investigators of the LVIF projects to convene in-person in Kruger Park (IVIS)

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: Facilitate opportunities for knowledge sharing and exchange through presentations, panels, and discussion

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Document the event to generate communication pieces for LVIF phase 1 program

Specific Objective 3: Click here to enter text.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

No.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Yes, the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document were effective. There were no unanticipated risks that affected the project.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no major ethical considerations for this RSP. All processes for the activities in the RSP were consistent with IDRC guidelines. IDRC hired consultants were made aware of any real or potential conflicts of interest and the responsible officer applied relevant IDRC guidelines.

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

## Program Leader / Manager comments

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

This RSP included the final dissemination and close-out event for the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF) projects at the International Veterinary Immunology Symposium (IVIS) 2023. The event, held in Kruger Park, South Africa, aimed to share the findings of the LVIF projects with an international community of scholars and stakeholders engaged in veterinary immunology. The report of the final event highlights the key objectives, achievements, and lessons learned from the event, which facilitated knowledge exchange, collaboration, and reflection among researchers, IDRC staff, and external participants. The event also included a panel discussion organized by LVIF, showcasing selected research projects and promoting further dialogue on livestock vaccine development. Andy Peters, member of the Governance Steering Committee of LVIF was present and gave opening remarks. Members of the International Veterinary Vaccine Network were also present. Samuel Thevasagayam, director of the agriculture program at the Gates Foundation was present at the IVVS conference and during our final event. During the conference he gave a presentation which clarified that moving forward, the Gates Foundation was going to invest more in solutions and less in knowledge. IDRC had high hopes of having an LVIF phase 2 but that did not concretize, even after multiple meetings with Gates where IDRC was clear about its commitment to continue investing in vaccines.

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

### Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Area, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Area, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

### Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
