--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 109047 - Novel vaccine design for preventing Streptococcus suis in swine  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Armando Heriazon  |
|  Former Responsible Officer |   |
|  Principal Investigator | Mariela Segura, Todd Lowary, and Potjanee Srimanote  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | University of Montreal, University of Alberta, and Thammasat University  |
|  Location: Country | Canada and Thailand  |
|  Location: Region | Asia  |
|  Area of research impact | Alternative to antimicrobials  |
|  Internal Funding | CRFS  |
|  External Funding | UK-DHSC  |
|  Project Start Date | 1 March 2019  |
|  Project Completion Date | 31 August 2023  |
|  Program theme sector | CRFS-AH  |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Armando Heriazon  |
|  Date of Report | 9 April 2024  |

## Project Abstract

Streptococcus suis, a bacterium covered by a 'sugar coat' (e.g. capsular polysaccharide) that kills young pigs resulting in significant economic problems for the global swine industry. Contaminated animals/pork can also transmit disease to humans (zoonosis). In Thailand, S. suis is the second most important cause of adult meningitis and high numbers (6.4/100,000 persons) of cases (fatal and non-fatal) are continuously reported. Preventing pig diseases not only have a positive economic impact but also improve animal welfare and reduce human cases. However, there are no effective commercial vaccines against S. suis available.

The objective of this project was to design the first chemically synthesized S. suis capsular polysaccharide (CPS)-based vaccine and provide proof-of-concept of its protective capacity. Capsular polysaccharide antigen fragments (epitopes) were selected, chemically synthesized, and linked to a carrier protein generating "glycoconjugates". By lowering production costs, novel chemical synthesis overcomes the limitations of conventional glycoconjugate vaccines. The immunogenic and protective capacities of different glycoconjugate prototypes and adjuvant formulations were sequentially characterized in well-controlled animal-challenge models (under laboratory conditions) and, finally, under "field-like" conditions using an experimental farm system in Thailand. The potential impact was the development of an innovative vaccine solution to control S. suis infections and reduce antimicrobial use in livestock production in Thailand. This strategy can be applied to other LMICs, where S. suis is a major problem.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

The team used unique and creative chemical synthesis and knowledge-based approaches to produce a panel of eight pure, structurally defined antigenic fragments of S. suis serotype 2 CPS

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

as well as modified fragments with potential cross-reactivity that would broaden vaccine coverage to other clinically relevant serotypes.

The team successfully developed analytical tests that allowed active ingredient characterization in terms of chemical (purity, yield, antigen loading) and immunological properties (vaccine-induced antibody levels, antibody isotype profile, and antibody functionality).

By using a go-no go approach and active ingredient characterization in a mouse model, the team pre-selected four glycoconjugate prototypes that were tested in the target species (pigs).

The team successfully standardized a reliable challenge model in the target species and validated this model under Thai swine production systems, including breeds.

One of the synthetic glycoconjugate prototypes induced significant protection in weaned piglets against S. suis clinical disease, representing the first proof of concept of a new generation glycoconjugate vaccine in veterinary medicine.

# RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

A patent cooperation treaty was filed, and out-licensing efforts are ongoing with the help of the Research Office of the University of Montreal, GlycoNet, and Axleys.

Characterization and Protective Activity of Monoclonal Antibodies Directed against Streptococcus suis Serotype 2 Capsular Polysaccharide Obtained Using a Glycoconjugate. Pathogens. 2019 (open access).

Sociocultural Factors Influencing Human Streptococcus suis Disease in Southeast Asia. Foods. 2022 (open access).

Lay publication - stakeholders: Gottschalk, M., and M. Segura. Streptococcus suis disease in pigs. Factsheet, Pork Information Gateway (web magazine), 2021. https://porkgateway.org/resource/ streptococcus-suis-disease-in-pigs/.

Lay publication - stakeholders: Dolbec, D., M. Lehoux, M. Gottschalk, and M. Segura. Les anticorps utiles pour combattre Streptococcus suis. La Terre de chez nous, 19 July 2021. https://www.laterre.ca/actualites/page-conseils/les-anticorps-utiles-pour-combattre-streptococcus-suis.

Media communication activity: GlycoNet Research Highlight. Title: "Developing the next generation vaccine to protect Canadian hog industry". By: Ali Chou, communications consultant. 2023 Annual Corporate Report. 08/2023.

5th International Workshop on Streptococcus suis (5th IWSs): Advanced Research in the Era of Antimicrobial Restriction. 2023. Participants: 42% women, Speakers: 50% women, and Posters: 47% women.

Invited Conference: Segura, M., P.-J. Li, M. Jana, M. Lo Fiego, R. P. Sweeney, P. Srimanote, M. Lehoux, M. Gottschalk, and T.L. Lowary. A new generation glycoconjugate vaccine against the swine and zoonotic pathogen Streptococcus suis. International Virtual Conference on Streptococcal infections (STREP-2023), USA, 2023.

Invited Keynote Conference: Gottschalk, M. Control of Streptococcus suis in the era of antimicrobial restriction. Asian Pig Veterinary Society, Taipei, Taiwan, 2 August 2023.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Invited Conference: Lowary, T.L., P.-J. Li, M. Jana, M. Lo Fiego, R. P. Sweeney, P. Srimanote, M. Lehoux, M. Gottschalk, and M. Segura. A new generation glycoconjugate vaccine against Streptococcus suis. 5th International Workshop on Streptococcus suis (IWSs) and 8th International Symposium on Emerging and Re-emerging Pig Diseases (ISERPD), Bangkok, Thailand, 4-7 June 2023.

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The project team completed most of their milestones with diligence and high-quality standards. The research team made some modifications to the methodology to make progress or improve the technology and achieve their milestones. While some objectives were not fully achieved as originally designed, it is important to note that they were modified to obtain better and more reliable results. The achievement of the modified objective at the end of the project is what matters because it advances the product through the development pipeline. For example, the team also had to change procedures to protect their technology. The original approach to screening glycan arrays was replaced with a different approach because another group of scientists published first their results and there was no point to continue. Continuing with the same approach might have affected the patent application. The new approach provided better information to select the candidates. Another problem encountered was the selection of the fragments from carbohydrates that could be coupled to a protein carrier. With the right trouble shooting the team was able to select the appropriate ones.

In vivo work in Thailand was delayed due to an outbreak of African swine fever. Despite the outbreak, the team was able to develop, standardize, and validate the challenge model to conduct the efficacy studies in Thailand. The COVID-19 pandemic affected mobilization and the execution of the clinical studies. The pandemic also affected the use of research facilities.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Antimicrobial Resistance, at a global level, is a major threat to human and animal health. Antimicrobials play a critical role in treating mostly bacterial farm animal diseases. However, the high production farm systems and the non-prudent use of antimicrobials, in both human and veterinary medicine, are associated with the emergence and spread of antimicrobial-resistant micro-organisms (e.g. bacteria) and has been identified as a risk factor for both human and animal infectious diseases. Alternative products to antimicrobials, such as the proposed vaccine, can play a crucial role in reducing the need, and hence, non-prudent use of antimicrobials in animal agriculture (e.g. preventing infectious diseases altogether). Streptococcus suis serotype 2 is one of the most important causes of bacterial infection and death in post-weaned piglets. These infections cause important economic losses to the swine industry and raise concerns about animal welfare. There is currently no commercial vaccine available for S. suis. This organism is also an emerging zoonotic pathogen (transmitted from pigs to humans) that causes adult meningitis. Therefore, it was of extreme importance to fund this project with the hope of finding a solution.

S. suis is covered by a capsular polysaccharide (CPS), which constitutes an essential virulence factor and allows the bacterium to evade the immune response and cause disease. This is important because, in general, polysaccharides are poor antigens, whereas proteins are, generally, immunogenic. However, there is some evidence of immune responses against CPS. Therefore, the team took advantage of this characteristic to develop a vaccine. Since sugars are

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

not immunogenic, they are generally linked to proteins to allow them to behave like antigens. The team was able to find the right sites to cut the polysaccharide to successfully conjugate them with the protein carrier to make them immunogenic and induce immune response in both mice and pigs. The team selected various fragments of CPS to be synthesized and coupled them to a protein carrier to improve their immunogenic properties. One candidate induced protection of piglets against a challenge using a highly virulent strain.

The team also identified and isolated a protein carrier from S. suis. This carrier has better immunogenic properties than the previous one and it is expected to induce a better immune response. The next step in this project is to conjugate the polysaccharide with this new carrier. Proof of efficacy will be performed to build on previous results. The team has generated a wealth of data and resources through this project that scientists will be utilizing for future funding applications, to reassess the potential of vaccine candidates in challenge trials. This research contributed to several areas including molecular genetics, pathology, biochemistry, immunology, vaccinology, and microbiology.

# 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The outputs above were of high quality and are commensurate with the purpose and risk level of the first phase of the project. This project generated important information that contributed to scientific knowledge in the areas of biochemistry, bacteriology, and immunology, as well as molecular genetics and vaccinology. The knowledge acquired was presented in several conferences that reached students, scientists, and investors from the pharmaceutical industry. Contribution of this research helps advance knowledge on S. suis and vaccine development. Some of the findings were not published due to intellectual property sensitivity.

In general, the project evolved as planned. The African swine fever outbreak in pigs changed the progress of the project. But in the end, the team was able to conduct the in vivo experiments in the target species. There were also some technical problems with the process to obtain the right polysaccharide fragments and with the process to link them to the carrier protein. These issues were troubleshooted with success and the team was able to assess the efficacy of several vaccine candidates in piglets.

Except for delays in some milestones that were adjusted to compensate for time, there were no impacts at the end on the delivery of the project. The team managed to adapt to the circumstances and modify procedures to move the candidate product to proof-of-concept. Additionally, the team was able to work, using the same technology, with an additional serotype that has been gaining importance. This work was done in parallel with additional funding from elsewhere. This has advanced the development of the prototype vaccine that could potentially provide wider protection.

# 6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?

Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.

Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.

Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project sought to test a unique technology to develop a vaccine that protects against S. suis in piglets. It offers a promising alternative to reduce the use of antimicrobials in pig farms. The new vaccine technology has the potential to increase swine health and reduce the need for antimicrobials. This was a discovery project, so it was not expected to have a finalized product at the end of the program. The expectation was to achieve a proof-of-concept study and the team met this goal. Additionally, there is a strong need for a vaccine that protects against S. suis. By

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

reducing infections in pigs, it also helps reduce infections of humans, particularly those in constant contact with pigs.

This project tackled an important gap: lack of innovative technological solutions to address some of IDRC's Development Outcomes. Thus, the project laid the foundation upon which subsequent work will be built to ultimately contribute to IDRC's Development Outcomes, especially "improving health for all". This is the first polysaccharide-based vaccine that has proven efficacy in pigs. In general, vaccines contribute to the "enhancing food and nutrition security" development outcome by reducing animal losses from disease and contributing to a sustainable animal health system for the future. The reduction in AM use also contributes to increased food safety. Healthy animals are also more likely to adapt to climate change. Vaccines are an important tool to improve animal health, which has a positive impact in production, and to reduce the use of antimicrobials.

This team involved farmers in their workshops, contributing to private sector engagement at the farm level. Additionally, this team received a letter of interest from one of the largest pharmaceutical companies. This contributes to private sector engagement at the level of product development.

# 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To design the first chemically synthesized S. suis capsular polysaccharide-based vaccine and provide proof-of-concept of its protective capacity.

☐4 Fully met
☑3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To chemically synthesize and select the best capsular polysaccharide epitope(s) and link them to a carrier protein generating glycoconjugates.

☑4 Fully met
☐3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: To characterize the immunogenic and protective capacities of different glycoconjugate vaccine prototypes and adjuvant formulations.

☑4 Fully met
☐3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 3: To study the immunological response and protection induced by the most promising glycoconjugate vaccine prototypes and formulations in post-weaned piglets under controlled disease challenge.

☑4 Fully met
☐3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 4: To validate the protective capacity of the best vaccine prototype under "field-like" conditions using an experimental farm system in Thailand.

☐4 Fully met
☑3
☐2
☐1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

There were few problems identified during the granting process. The team had to wait for their research agreement until the government from Thailand granted Thammasat University country clearance. This delayed receiving funds from IDRC. However, once country clearance was obtained, all financial processes went smoothly and without any problems. The teams responded quickly to all IDRC's requests. Changes in the budgets due to modification of milestones were discussed with and approved by IDRC.

The recipient from the University of Montreal spent all the funds under the project. The recipient reported a contribution of CAD 90,965, which is the same amount committed to in the Grant Agreement. The recipient from the University of Alberta spent all the funds under the project with a small overrun of CAD 437. The Recipient committed to a CAD 33,000 contribution as stated in the Grant Agreement. The Recipient reported that CAD 66,062 was received from Canadian Glycomics Network in funding towards the project and confirmed that no in-kind contributions were done under the project. The recipient from Thammasat University spent 86.9% of the approved budget. The is a saving of 693,285 THB (~CAD 25,329) to the project. The Recipient reported contributions of THB 1,124,080, which is higher than the amount (514,080 THB) committed in the Grant Agreement.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

One of the identified risks for this project was the country clearance approval for Thailand. The InnoVet-AMR team established processes that allowed the Thai team to apply for country clearance in a timely manner.

Several risks related to the technology were identified before the start of the project. The risks identified with the technology were mitigated by developing a proper research support package that included training on technology, regulatory, intellectual property, quality assurance, marketing / commercialization, and gender. In addition, the InnoVet-AMR team hired various consultants to evaluate the projects in several aspects, including feasibility of the technology to reach market, regulatory, intellectual property, and marketing / commercialization. The

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

consultants provided their findings and advice to the teams. One risk not identified was related to the methodology of glycan array screening and its IP. A publication using this method was found and the team thought it was not worth continue working on it; Instead, the team sought an innovative approach for the selection of CPS fragments that provided more information for a better design of the candidate vaccine.

There were two big risks that were not identified before the start of the project. One was the COVID-19 pandemic, and the other one was an outbreak of African Swine Fever in Thailand. These two outbreaks had negative impacts on the execution of the activities of the project. The COVID-19 pandemic affected mobilization and use of the research facilities, as well as the sampling of farms. It also affected the cost and acquisition of reagents. The outbreak of African Swine Fever significantly impacted the price and availability of piglets which were required for the challenge experiments and delayed starting the clinical trials. Mitigation strategies, such as extension and supplementation of the project, were developed to overcome these challenges.

## 10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project?

You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no risks that emerged throughout the project or problems/challenges related to ethics. The ethics approvals were received as requested and before the start of the experiments involving animals.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

This project was one of eleven IDRC funded projects which were developed through the Innovative Veterinary Solutions for antimicrobial resistance (InnoVet-AMR), a partnership with the UK Department of Health and Social Care (UK-DHSC). The objective of this initiative was to develop alternatives (including vaccines) to antibiotics in the veterinary sector. In addition, this project was 1 of 2 focusing on developing a vaccine against S.suis, a zoonotic disease affecting pigs and humans alike. Now, no vaccine for this disease exists. The focus of the InnoVet-AMR 2.0 was to develop new products and therefore a series of training opportunities was developed by IDRC to accompany the research teams in the product development process toward commercialization. This project has reached proof of concept which was one of the main indicators of success of the InnoVet-AMR program. Before finalizing the project and the program, a new phase has been negotiated with the UK-DHSC, InnoVet-AMR 2.0. A component of this new program will be to continue funding the projects of InnoVet-AMR1.0 within a second phase. This project is well positioned to receive further funding in this new phase of funding.

Renée Larocque
Program Leader

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

The project has delivered several key outcomes that are important to the veterinary sector in developing countries. As presented by the PO it is essential to highlight the successful creation of antigenic fragments of S. suis serotype 2 CPS through chemical synthesis, the development of tests to characterize the active ingredient, the pre-selection of four

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 7 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

glycoconjugate prototypes, the standardization of a reliable challenge model in the target species, and the successful induction of significant protection in weaned piglets against S. suis clinical disease using one of the synthetic glycoconjugate prototypes.

I agree with the program leader's comments, emphasizing the importance of partnerships like the Innovative Veterinary Solutions for Antimicrobial Resistance (InnoVet-AMR), a collaboration between IDRC and the UK Department of Health and Social Care (UK-DHSC). This initiative is another excellent example of the role of alternatives to antibiotics in the veterinary sector, including vaccines. The success of this project in achieving proof of concept demonstrates the value of such partnerships in the fight against antimicrobial resistance.

I approve this PCR
Santiago Alba-Corral
Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

Click here to enter text.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Click here to enter text.

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

Last Revised March 2021
