--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 110187 Stakeholder Consultations for Future Climate-Smart Livestock Systems  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Victor Mbao  |
|  Former Responsible Officer |   |
|  Principal Investigator |   |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | • Elea Africa (conference organisers)
• The University of Nairobi (grantee)
• NIYEL Senegal,
• Southern African Institute for Policy and Research Limited (SAIPAR) (grantee)
• Dr. Hlami Ngwenya (Facilitator)  |
|  Location: Country | Kenya, Senegal and Zambia  |
|  Location: Region | Sub Sahara Africa  |
|  Area of research impact | Sub Sahara Africa  |
|  Internal Funding | 262K  |
|  External Funding | 337K (BMGF)  |
|  Project Start Date | 2023/05/26  |
|  Project Completion Date | 2024/05/26  |
|  Program theme sector | AH - RECAF  |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Sofia Jomo and Victor Mbao  |
|  Date of Report | September 8, 2025  |

# Project Abstract

The Climate-Resilient Animal Fund - RECAF (formerly Climate Smart Livestock Systems (CSLS)) is a six-year research initiative co-funded by IDRC and the Gates Foundation (CAD11.450M). It was set up on October 2022. The initiative focuses on developing climate-smart livestock technologies and business models to improve animal productivity, promote adaptation and lower emission intensity for smallholder livestock farmers in climatic hotspots in Sub Sahara Africa. The Fund seeks to centre gender equity and inclusion in its design and implementation while advancing and scaling locally appropriate, gender-inclusive solutions to mitigate the risks that climate change poses to food systems.

To be Africa-centred and better understand the contextual research landscape, it was critical for the Fund to be informed by African stakeholders drawn from smallholder livestock farming communities, gender, academia, researchers, climate change and livestock experts. Consequently, the Fund was initiated through a multi-stakeholder consultative process involving three regional consultative meetings, two literature reviews and one-on-one online interviews.

The regional meetings will be held in Kenya, Zambia and Senegal to cover eastern, southern, central and western Africa regions. The output from this comprehensive process informed program design and subsequent calls for proposals. This RSP support two grantees, three consultants to host the meetings in the three countries and prepare two literature reviews.

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

# PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

1. Three regional consultative meetings in Nairobi, Kenya, Saly, Senegal, and Livingstone, Zambia. The comprised smallholder livestock farming communities, gender, climate change and livestock experts, and government officials. 180 participants from 32 African countries, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America

2. Fifteen one-on-one online interviews were held with representatives of smallholder livestock communities, gender experts, climate change and livestock experts, funding organisations and livestock researchers.

3. Two literature reviews. The three regional consultative meetings. The outputs from both the consultative meetings and the literature reviews informed the program design for the RECAF program and subsequent calls for proposals.

# RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

This RSP supported the commissioning of two literature reviews on Climate-Smart Technologies for Livestock Systems:

1) A Literature Review on Climate-Smart Technologies for Livestock Systems in sub-Saharan Africa by the Food, Agriculture and Natural Resources Policy Analysis Network (FANRPAN).(https://oidrc.sharepoint.com:/w:/r/sites/int-ppb-FLSC/development/CSLS%20consultative%20process/Literature%20Review%20on%20CSLS%20FANRPAN.docx?d=wf8ffa9e9d5a04533b586338c1aefd80c&amp;csf=1&amp;web=1&amp;e=4UTGXq)

2) A Literature Review on Climate-Smart Livestock Technologies in Africa by Mercy Corps through a Supporting Pastoralism and Agriculture in Recurrent and Protracted Crises (SPARC) collaboration. (https://oidrc.sharepoint.com:/b:/r/sites/int-ppb-FLSC/development/CSLS%20consultative%20process/CSLS%20Literature%20review%20230724.pdf?csf=1&amp;web=1&amp;e=DuK1e5).

In addition, IDRC commissioned a writer to draft a RECAF Consultative Report. The report triangulated all the information from the interviews, the literature reviews and the in-person regional consultations. Here is the report: Future Climate Smart Livestock Systems - RECAF Consultative Report English August 2025.pdf - Modified

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.
Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?
Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

The results of this RSP were cardinal to understanding research priorities in the design of climate smart livestock technologies. This contributed to a tailored design of the RECAF program to address the many elements of the field in a way that answered the farmers views as well as the researchers' opinions on these priorities. The literature reviews also informed the program design of RECAF.

One of the most striking insights was that many farmers and researchers felt a wealth of proven technologies already existed—but had not been widely adopted. Rather than investing in the development of new solutions, they called for greater research efforts focused on scaling these existing innovations. In response, the second Call for Proposals prioritized exploring the potential to scale up technologies that improve feed and forage, herd and land management, water use, livestock productivity and health, circular economies, and waste management.

Another contribution to the climate smart livestock technologies field was a call from the consultation participants for indigenous knowledge to be integrated in the solutions. At project selections stage by the RECAF Governance Steering Committee, this theme was highlighted and taken as a strategic consideration in selecting projects.

5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?
Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The RSP achieved its intended results. It did go beyond the intended support to the program by highlighting importance of scaling and business models for already existing technologies as well as integration of indigenous knowledge. This success could be attributed to the inclusivity of the consultative process.

6. How did this project contribute one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the Strategic Plan. Provide specific numbers where possible.

- Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change

The RSP aimed to distil relevant information on climate smart ideas from a wide array of stakeholders including climate practitioners and smallholder farmers in Africa to design a responsive research agenda. In this respect, it contributed to IDRC's investment in high quality research and innovation.

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

# 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: The main objective of the project is to organize three consultative meetings, two literature reviews, and related operations of the RECAF.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To fund three grantees who will host the three meetings in Kenya, Senegal and Zambia.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: To support an event moderator and main organiser for the three consultative meetings.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment:

Specific Objective 3: To commission two literature review consultancies.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The IDRC's administration of this RSP was commendable as it involved a dynamic collaboration among four institutions and consultants. Elea Africa Group Ltd was the main event organizer, Dr.

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

Hlami Ngwenya was the moderator. The University of Nairobi, NIYEL, and The Southern African Institute for Policy and Research SAIPAR who all held active grants at the time - were each involved in supporting flights and accommodation of their own participants.

The payment to the hotel in Nairobi was quite late due to a late request submitted to IDRC by University of Nairobi. However, due to the relationship between the hotel and the university, the workshop was still held pending payment which prevented delays. This was a clear demonstration of leveraging a grantee with established local networks.

## STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Although the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document were effective in mitigating the major risks, an unanticipated risk of flight cancellations by airlines occurred and this led to some participants missing the first day of some of the consultative meetings. Therefore, in future convenings, the potential risk of flight cancellations by airlines and appropriate mitigation measures should be put in place.

There was potential for political unrest in Dakar at the time of the workshops. This was mitigated by using Saly as an alternative safer venue.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

There were no major ethical considerations for this RSP as the planned activities did not involve research or direct engagement with vulnerable communities. All processes for the activities in the RSP were consistent with IDRC guidelines.

## Program Leader / Manager comments

Program Leaders/Managers should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

The Climate-Resilient Animal Fund (RECAF), formerly known as Climate Smart Livestock Systems (CSLS), is a six-year research initiative co-funded by IDRC and the Gates Foundation, aimed at developing climate-smart livestock technologies and business models to improve animal productivity, promote adaptation, and lower emission intensity for smallholder livestock farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa. The initiative emphasizes gender equity and inclusion while advancing locally appropriate solutions to mitigate climate change risks to food systems. The project involved multi-stakeholder consultations, regional meetings in Kenya, Zambia, and Senegal, and literature reviews, which informed the program design and subsequent calls for proposals.

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC CRDI

The literature reviews yielded several key recommendations:

- Adopt a holistic system approach for climate-smart livestock systems.
- Develop long-term funding strategies to ensure sufficient time for implementation and the establishment of sustainable structures and strategies.
- Incorporate local knowledge and institutions.
- Address gender gaps and customize technologies to better support women involved in livestock-related activities.

The consultative process identified numerous research priorities, which were subsequently categorized into four main thematic areas for the RECAF program:

1. Water, pastures, and feed management.
2. Indigenous knowledge systems, climate data, and management.
3. Integration of renewable energy and circular economies.
4. Animal health.

The call for concept notes required applicants to address at least one of these four thematic areas.

The consultative process was lengthy but highly informative in preparing the program and calls for proposals. We were committed to ensuring that this program reflected a bottom-up approach, and I believe we succeeded. Additionally, we included local experts on our Governance Steering Committee to ensure we continuously fully understand the realities of Southern livestock keepers. The Gates Foundation was very supportive of this approach.

## Director comments

The relevant Program or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

## Action Items / Next Steps

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Area, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Area, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer and Vice-President Strategy, Regions and Policy Branch, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President SRPB.

CRFS, Santiago Alba Corral, Kathryn Touré, Marie-Gloriose Ingabire

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.
