--- Page 0 ---

# PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | 109062: Advancing women's participation in the livestock vaccine value chain in Nepal, Senegal and Uganda  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Evelyn Baraké  |
|  Former Responsible Officer | Wendy Manchur  |
|  Principal Investigator | Nargiza Ludgate (formerly Sandra Russo)  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | University of Florida  |
|  Location: Country | USA  |
|  Location: Region |   |
|  Area of research impact | Nepal, Senegal, Uganda  |
|  Internal Funding | CA$ 198,950  |
|  External Funding | CA$ 1,647,521  |
|  Project Start Date | March 15, 2019  |
|  Project Completion Date | September 15, 2023  |
|  Program theme sector |   |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Wendy Manchur, Evelyn Baraké  |
|  Date of Report | January 8, 2024  |

## Project Abstract

Small ruminants and poultry provide key benefits to women in many developing countries. Unfortunately, in many livestock value chains, women have lower access than men to vaccines and have limited ability to influence decision-making within households around vaccination and animal health. New gender transformative approaches are needed to deal with this issue, to move the debate beyond the traditional men/women dichotomy and determine new ways that improve women's ability to participate in, and benefit from, these value chains. This project will examine gendered roles and relations in selected vaccine distribution chains for diseases that affect livestock species belonging to or primarily managed by women. The diseases of focus include Peste des Petits Ruminants among small ruminants and Newcastle Disease and Avian Influenza in poultry. All three of these diseases are endemic to Africa, highly contagious and with a high mortality. The research team will address issues of intersectionality on women's involvement in the vaccine distribution chain and provide capacity development using the application of a Gendered Intersectional Transformative Approach (GITA). A gender and intersectional mapping tool will be developed for small ruminant and poultry vaccine distribution chains. A multi-country analysis will assess the impacts and barriers of gender and intersectionality on women's entry and effective participation in and benefits from the vaccine distribution chain.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Click here to enter text.

1. Using a Gender-Intersectional Transformative Approach (GITA), demonstrated that gender differences are not the only ones that matter – intersectional analysis is essential to unveil sites of exclusion and marginality in livestock vaccine distribution systems: in some cases, ethnic and caste differences can override those determined by gender.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

2. Produced and published the first mappings of the Livestock Vaccine Value Chain (LVVC) for Newcastle Disease and Peste des petits ruminants in Nepal, Karamoja subregion in Uganda, and Kaffrine in Senegal, incorporating the key stakeholders, their drivers, incentives and gender capacities. Due to their quality and thoroughness, these papers (and the project's final report country-specific annexes) should be shared with any future animal health project in these areas.

3. Through a meta-analysis, demonstrated evidence on reducing barriers and creating opportunities for women for more inclusive LVVCs in different contexts, with implications for scalability documented for all three countries.

4. Demonstrated the significance of qualitative research in this very technical field for understanding how to improve animal vaccine value chain to many skeptical actors, including journal reviewers who are not well versed in qualitative research methods.

5. Demonstrated the importance of integrating soft skills (gender, facilitation, empathic listening and communication, conflict management and entrepreneurship) into the training of technical animal health practitioners. The team produced an impressive number of high-quality training materials to support this kind of holistic service provision for farmers, community animal health workers, veterinarians and trainers tailored to specific ethnic groups and linguistic communities.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

This team produced many high-quality gender inclusive and intersectional training and community sensitization materials, with versions specific to each country in 8 languages (in some cases, the visual representations differing in the same country to represent the dress and specificities of different ethnic groups). The team distributed 200 memory sticks with copies of the materials in local languages to stakeholders and over 10,000 physical copies of the sensitization materials. IDL link to this library of project outputs:

The list below represents a small sample:

1. Flipbooks: Nepalese version: Happy Animals, Happy People flipbook, available also in Nepali, and corresponding training guide
2. Posters: Bonne alimentation pour des animaux en bonne santé - Senegal, also available in Wolof and in Pular, and corresponding training guide
3. Training material for integrating gender into animal health for community animal health worker trainers working in the LVVC in Karamoja, Uganda; (1) Gendered Intersectional

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Transformative Approach, (2) Facilitation and training, (3) Communication and conflict resolution, (5) Animal Health, Vaccinations and GITA, (6) Animal Health and GITA

4. Training of trainers manuals for Nepal, Senegal and Uganda
5. Community Animal Health Workers training material – Facilitation Manual for Uganda, One Day Training in Animal Health for Livestock Services Division Staff and Goat Cooperatives in Nepal
6. Publications (6 more publications are pending at the time of writing this PCR):

- Acosta D, Ludgate N, McKune SL and Russo S (2022) Who Has Access to Livestock Vaccines? Using the Social-Ecological Model and Intersectionality Frameworks to Identify the Social Barriers to Peste des Petits Ruminants Vaccines in Karamoja, Uganda. Front. Vet. Sci. 9:831752. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2022.831752
- Serra, R.; Ludgate, N.; Fiorillo Dowhaniuk, K.; McKune, S.L.; Russo, S. Beyond the Gender of the Livestock Holder: Learnings from Intersectional Analyses of PPR Vaccine Value Chains in Nepal, Senegal, and Uganda. Animals 2022, 12, 241.
- McKune S, Serra R, Toure` A (2021) Gender and intersectional analysis of livestock vaccine value chains in Kaffrine, Senegal. PLoS ONE 16(7): e0252045.
- National COVID-19 regulations: impacts on livestock vaccinations, veterinary services, and research activities in Nepal, Senegal, and Uganda, 2021-10-26
- Joint methods paper with all 4 cohort projects (109061-64): McKune S, Galiè A, Miller BA, Bukachi SA, Bikaako W and Pyburn R (2023) Studying a gender responsive vaccine system: retrospective analysis of best methods. Front. Sustain. Food Syst. 7:1176101. doi: 10.3389/fsufs.2023.117610

7. Policy Briefs

- Karamoja, Uganda: Gender and social inclusion training for vet and animal health service providers, Gender-responsive and inclusive veterinary extension for healthy animals, reduced poverty and empowered women
- Uganda, National (in collaboration with project 109061): Making vaccines available and accessible to women and other marginalized livestock farmers
- Senegal: Improving vaccine access in Kaffrine (available in FR, EN)
- Nepal: Integrating gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) in animal health delivery in Nepal (available in English and Nepali)

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality.

Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

Click here to enter text.

## PROJECT OUTCOMES

4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Click here to enter text.

## Scientific Contributions

This project contributed many scientific articles (see above) on barriers and opportunities for women and/or members of other groups (caste, ethnicity, rurality, etc) in the Livestock

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Vaccines Value Chain (LVVC). The project has engaged stakeholders from private and public sectors as key partners in implementation, mapped out for the first time LVVC stakeholders and engaged them from the project's onset. They have tested models that can be adopted by others in the same field that focus on improving household wellbeing through increased livestock productivity, food security, and livelihood, by empowering women and members of other disadvantaged groups in the LVVC to effectively contribute and benefit from their participation in these systems.

The project also contributed to the field through:

- Their use of qualitative and quantitative intersectional analysis activities, demonstrating that the exclusion of certain groups is not only based on gender, and the associated endline findings on how interventions targeting intersectional barriers to accessing animal health services and vaccines impacted underlying gender and other norms.
- Their use of the Women's Empowerment in Livestock Index (WELI) to compare empowerment across various groups (beyond just women and men), which can lead to more nuanced findings, and can inform the further development of the WELI. This team is the first to use the WELI tool in this way. While gender was shown to be an important indicator across all three countries, their WELI results show additional consistent differences by caste and remoteness in Nepal; ethnicity, disability, age and marital status in Karamoja, Uganda; and ethnicity and remoteness in Kaffrine, Senegal.
- Demonstrating the tangible benefits of integrating soft skills and GITA in training technical staff in the livestock sector in terms of increasing access to livestock health services to women from marginalized communities or who live in remote areas, increasing vaccination rates, improving quality of services, appreciating the diversity of livestock keepers, and improving livestock (para)professionals' relationships with the communities they serve. The wealth of context-relevant and accessible training materials and curriculums they developed can contribute to entrenching and sustaining these practices.

## Research Impact

This research was important to fund due to the widespread barriers and limitations impeding women from participating and/or fully benefiting from the livestock vaccine chain. Their endline findings demonstrated that both men and women were starting to challenge the socio-cultural norms about women and take action to create more inclusion to improve their livelihoods and the health of their animals. They employed a strong Training of Trainers (ToT) tiered approach, training top vets and DVOs with soft skills, who then trained extension staff and community animal health workers (CAHWs), who then did community sensitization with communities. Across the three countries, the team reached:

- 44 (9w/35m) total veterinarians, livestock/animal husbandry staff and technical agents trained directly;
- 143 (50w/93m) Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs) trained by veterinarians;
- 1,863 (1,214w/649m) participants in community sensitization activities in partnership with CAHWs and veterinarians

Further important outcomes include:

- Bringing intersectional analysis into (and adapting it to) livestock research. This well-known approach in gender studies is new to livestock/veterinary specialists;

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

- Helping governments understand that broad policies do not address localized problems. Approaches need to be tailored to specific contexts and to the differentiated needs and experiences of communities and individuals;
- Reiterating that empowerment is defined differently by local communities (men and women) in different contexts and it varies with the western definitions of empowerment.
- Increasing the capacity of early career researchers, as over 30 students and researchers from the University of Florida and local research organizations in target countries were involved in this project. All PI, co-PIs and other senior UF team members were involved and dedicated considerable time as supervisors and thesis committee members for multiple students.

# 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

Click here to enter text.

This project comprised a strong team of researchers that are committed to, and believe in, feminist approaches and women's empowerment, and coming with different disciplines that are complementary applying participatory approaches. The structure of the LVIF call, requiring gender leads as the PIs was essential to its success. The length of this PCR section will testify to the fact that projects with a gender-transformative ambition using mixed-methods and participatory approaches, especially across multiple project sites, are complex and benefit considerably from a strong relationship with the IDRC responsible officer and from participating in a cohort in order to adapt to situational challenges and achieve results.

COVID-19 related shutdowns and movement restrictions halted all field related activities in all countries in 2020 and led to field-based activities being behind by one year. To mitigate, they reverted to virtual meetings and discussions where possible including sessions of write shops for the preparation of manuscripts and telephone surveys with participants. This forced the USA-based team to rely more heavily on in-country partners, which despite initial challenges, was an empowering opportunity for country leads and their institutions, with these leads taking on increasing leadership within the project. IDRC granted all 4 projects in the cohort, including this one, an initial 12-month extension to make up for the lost time. This team also supported the COVID-19 response efforts (providing masks, soap, PPE) to mitigate impact in the communities where they are engaged.

The project was extended a second time, bringing the end date to the end of July 2023. This extension, granted to all the projects in the cohort provided additional time for knowledge sharing activities and to implement recommendations related to project and impact sustainability. From IDRC's perspective, it also eased the logistical burden of attending Women Deliver 2023 in Kigali and was the venue for the final dissemination and workshop, enabling the cohort to gather in person for the first time since the inception workshop. This extension, paired with a supplement, also enabled the team to apply lessons learnt from the success of another team in the cohort (109061) and conduct unplanned community engagement activities, including a final stakeholder engagement meeting in each country to share the findings back with research participants, and in Uganda, to deliver small "kits" to community animal health workers with some much-needed materials and equipment.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

In Uganda, this team worked in the conflict prone Karamoja subregion. Over the course of the project the security situation worsened (livestock raids, violent robberies and armed conflict), making it challenging to conduct research and impacted project stakeholders. The team continued to follow the United Nations Department of Safety and Security (UNDSS) recommendations and consult with local NGO community throughout the project. Travel to certain sub counties, where the project was carrying out work, was deemed too volatile and the team followed travel restriction guidelines issued by the UNDSS, resulting in the team dropping some sub-counties and increasing numbers in others. The team relied heavily on their in-country coordinator (when and where travel was deemed safe) as well as district and sub-county veterinary staff who were engaged in the research activities for updates to adapt field work. In the final year of the project, horrific famine in region resulted in further adaptation by the project. The team also supported the humanitarian effort via their institution with food baskets.

In early 2020, to manage COVID and the situation in Karamoja, discussions between the project team and the Responsible Officer led to the creation of Research Advisory Boards (RAB) in target countries to support their work on the ground (a structure similar to former CIFSRF projects). The team selected their RAB carefully in each country with high-level members working on the transformation of livestock vaccine value chains (researchers, practitioners, NGO representatives and decision and policy makers), and met with these stakeholder groups regularly. The RAB guidance provided invaluable input into the research process, helped the team maintain an adaptive approach, and elevated the evidence and messages to government bodies. Having a RAB for the first time was a very enlightening process for this very strong group of UF researchers, and will likely influence the way they conduct future research.

The Gendered Intersectional Transformative Approach (GITA), central to the proposal, was very theoretical, and the team struggled with how to operationalize it. The challenges to in-person field work affected their ability to concretized and assess how the GITA can lead to improvements and change for livestock smallholders. While it didn't proceed as planned, the GITA helped them pay attention to gender and intersectionality. The end results validate the importance of taking an intersectional approach, demonstrating that unpacking gender norms requires understanding and taking into account local context and power structures.

As much as the LVIF GSC were initially hesitant to fund them in the review stage of the call (see proposal reviews on file), this team supported and pulled the other teams along at times, leading many of the cohort CoPs, and leading on the collaborative synthesis work. Lessons from a cohort approach are that you will have different strengths and weaknesses among the varied project teams, and there are roles for all to play. The UF team also appreciated working with the other projects in the cohort who were more applied, adapting some of their own methodologies into their research (see the final report from the WELI support RSP).

The Women's Empowerment in Livestock Index (WELI) was a common tool that IDRC asked the cohort of 4 LVIF women's empowerment projects to adopt to create the possibility of meta-analysis for stronger data and greater impact of findings on women's empowerment. Under another CRFS project (RSP 109786), the CGIAR Gender Platform (lead by ILRI) has been

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

contracted to synthesize IDRC's use of Women's Empowerment Indicators, drawing on the experiences from the 12 IDRC projects (8 from CultiAF and 4 from LVIF). However, the WELI is more of a pilot tool, requiring more resources than anticipated and all the LVIF teams had difficulty cleaning and analyzing their baseline data. It took much more resources than anticipated (time and budgeted), and all 4 LVIF teams ended up hiring biostatisticians to support this work. Despite the challenges, use of the WELI has enabled the team to publish interesting results relating to intersectionality, and the team is in discussions with ILRI (who developed the tool) to adapt the tool towards more intersectional approaches.

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC's strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy. Provide specific numbers where possible.

Click here to enter text.

Gender Equality
The project contributes to IDRC outcomes on gender equality by facilitating women's empowerment through training and access to resources and focuses on the prevention of emerging infectious diseases and zoonotic disease, leading to improved livestock health and productivity. It also enhances women's economic empowerment and leadership. The project is also well aligned with the CRFS (and IDRC's) gender strategy on promoting gender-transformative approaches with a high potential to change existing gender norms towards gender equality. The contributions towards this outcome were highlighted through the final dissemination activities that took place at Women Deliver 2023 in Kigali, an important global forum for advancing gender equality. The project worked in Senegal, which provided LVIF with the opportunity to strengthen its West African portfolio.

Impact at scale
The project leveraged existing livestock systems efforts by the Feed the Future Innovation Lab for Livestock Systems at the University of Florida (UF) in East and West Africa, and Asia to test an approach in three countries to address current research gaps in connecting gender and food and nutrition security. The project was expected to work directly with at least 1,200 women smallholder farmers and their and exceeded this despite the pandemic. Indirectly, the project is expected to reach many more at national scales given the interventions are working with government and non-government extension services, community animal health workers (CAHWs) and veterinary service providers.

Building leaders for today and tomorrow:
The project was expected to train 6-8 master's and PhD students (3-4 UF graduate students who will be paired with local graduate students in each country), and exceeded this by working with 30 graduate students and interns.

Partner of Choice:
The project was funded through LVIF, a donor-partnership program comprising IDRC, Global Affairs Canada, and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. This project also an opportunity for IDRC to partner with, and leverage the network and capacities, of the Feed the Future Innovation Lab network, funded by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) and the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation to 2022. Lastly, the project also built on a

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 7 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

currently collaboration between Tufts University and the University of implementing innovative methods to deliver a thermostable PPR vaccine in the pastoral communities in Uganda and Kenya, a natural link between this project and another LVIF gender project (#109061).

# 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

## Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To empower women to effectively contribute and benefit from the vaccine supply chain as entrepreneurs, service/product providers and users. Click here to enter text.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☑ 2
☑ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To design a gender and intersectional mapping tool for small ruminant and poultry vaccine value chains, and test it in Nepal, Senegal, and Uganda

☐ 4 Fully met
☑ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: The GITA "tool" was more of a process, not unlike most social science methods, of interrogating who is doing what across the LVVC. This helped them understand the action nodes where their research is operating and can make a difference

Specific Objective 2: To evaluate the impacts of gender, intersectionality and other site/country specific characteristics (socio-economic, technical, political) on women's entry and effective participation in and benefits from the vaccine value chain

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 3: To remove barriers for women's entry and participation in the vaccine value chain by applying a Gendered Intersectional Transformative Approach through various modes of training and innovative interventions that will lead to their inclusive participation in vaccine distribution chains.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 8 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The personnel costs were initially at 52% of the total budget, and reduced to 33% after the Responsible Officer requested a revised budget. The personnel costs were still higher than the 25% recommended by IDRC, however justifiable given the scope of work and activities taking place in three countries over the duration and need to ensure quality results. Women's empowerment in the livestock value chain is a relatively new area of development research, with few institutions experienced in this niche. The UF team is composed of strong interdisciplinary researchers comprising of veterinarians, anthropologists, gender specialists amongst other disciplines. IDRC should review its cap on personnel costs for this type of social science research if we expect high quality results from high calibre teams.

The team commented multiple times over the years how the IDRC granting process was efficient, flexible and less of an administrative burden on the project team and university than US federally funded projects (e.g., USAID) that they are used to, and greatly appreciated working with the IDRC grants process.

The flexibility in IDRC granting allowed them extensions was critical as the team lost nearly a full year as a result of the pandemic. The second extension enabled them to take advantage of the major Women Deliver Conference in Kigali in July 2023 to disseminate their findings at a side event, alongside the other projects in the cohort.

The focus on deliverables by the Responsible Officer instead of adherence to a pre-defined process details was helpful for this type of action research. Regular bi-monthly check-in meetings with IDRC were critical to give immediate feedback rather than waiting at the end of the reporting period.

The cohort model

As this project was one among four that responded to an LVIF call for proposals on addressing dimensions of gender inequalities and barriers in the LVVC, and with similar start and end times, the Responsible Officer brought the cohort together at regular intervals to exchange and share learnings with high turnout. The goal was to build a body of evidence and comparable results that can have greater impact and policy influence and create opportunities for joint capacity building. It also fostered deeper shared learning, stimulated peer-to-peer exchanges, cross-project learning and collaboration across countries and projects. Feedback from the teams indicated it was a value add to their projects and a positive experience. All the projects adapted, clarified, and strengthened their methodologies through their participation in the cohort, and collaborating on advocacy contributed to stronger impacts. Inviting in outside experts to presentation and critique provided opportunities for project reflections.

Once COVID-19 related restrictions eased and fieldwork resumed, the CoP meetings ceased as teams were suddenly very busy and catching up on lost time. Had there been a point person to lead collaborative activities on each team, the CoP momentum might have been sustained. There were also suggestions to have technical projects (upstream) involved in the cohort from the start to facilitate interaction and mutual learning between gender/social scientists and product development-focused scientists, which would have allowed them to adapt their projects to the learning along the way, instead of waiting to have the first full LVIF learning

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 9 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

event in November of 2022 and at the end of the programme in November 2023. The projects also reflected that there would be an opportunity for much more cross-project synthesis, leveraging the significant body of comparable evidence that was generated across all four projects. Facilitating this in the context of EFPs, given project timelines and funding envelopes, is a challenge for IDRC to reflect upon.

This project felt there was some duplication of efforts due to the fact the team was conducting a meta-analysis across three countries, and then was asked to further synthesize its work within the context of the cohort. In hindsight, they reflected that LVIF should have limited the projects to a single country per project. Nonetheless, the team felt that the LVIF cohort was a net gain due to the increased collaboration it made possible.

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

The project was asked to include a risk assessment and propose mitigation measures. Almost all risk mitigation measures were applied and were effective. The unanticipated risk was the COVID-19 pandemic, and the team worked within their limits to work virtually where it was possible and shifted to writing their implementation strategies in the first year of covid where field work was impossible. IDRC granted two extensions which allowed them to complete the activities and milestones.

Click here to enter text.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

Click here to enter text.

All proceeded smoothly (with some delays in Uganda due to new country processes). Their ethics review was done through the University of Florida Institutional Review Boards, in conjunction with the in-country ethical review boards, prior to conducting the research, and updated any time there were changes to their research plans.

One thing of note is that most of the team's publications (notably the baseline analyses) do not include country coordinators and other locally based partners as co-authors. This was flagged to the responsible officer by other teams in the cohort, who felt the need to point out that locally based partners are essential in accessing communities, translating and interpreting findings and that failing to ensure their contributions are properly recognized in academic publishing and that the career benefits associated with publication do not extend to them is inequitable. This is a significant oversight from a team that otherwise has shown significant commitment to feminist approaches, and an area in which IDRC responsible officers should pay particular attention and play an active role in promoting equitable authorship, and that clarity and guidance be put in place by IDRC PPB to reduce these instances.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 10 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

# Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

Click here to enter text.

This project was funded through the Livestock Vaccine Innovation Fund (LVIF), which was co-funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF), Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and IDRC. The fund was a 57$ CAD partnership of 8 years. It ended in March 2024. The Fund initially had a huge interest from GAC to have projects reaching women farmers while BMGF were less interested in the downstream type projects. BMGF did demonstrate a lot of interest as the projects moved along. A gender specialist working group was created by IDRC to discuss the best way to incorporate gender into the vaccine value chain for animals through a Call for Proposals. One of the main recommendations that came along was requiring gender leads as the PIs (not vaccine expert). Therefore, IDRC launched a closed call for proposals on addressing dimensions of gender inequalities and barriers in the livestock vaccine value chain. This project was one of 4 selected projects. IDRC really adopted a cohort approach with bringing the 4 projects together on a regular interval. The teams were also asked by IDRC to adopt the Women's Empowerment in Livestock Index (WELI) tool to create the possibility of meta-analysis for stronger data and greater impact of findings on women's empowerment.

The project had very impressive list of publications and delivered many trainings. The main applicant being the University of Florida, negotiating the Grant Agreements was highly challenging and time demanding. This is something observed with many US Universities. In addition, this project seemed very northern led and the LVIF team had to remind the University of Florida of the importance of incorporating all the stakeholders at all levels of the project. Overall, a very successful project.

Renée Larocque

Program Leader, Animal Health

# Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

Once more, this is another example of a project that taught us that using a Gender-Intersectional Transformative Approach was crucial for identifying exclusion and marginalization in livestock vaccine distribution systems. The project aligned with IDRC and CRFS 2030 vision by empowering women through training and access to resources, focusing on preventing emerging infectious and zoonotic diseases to improve livestock health and productivity. The team effectively managed risks by implementing various risk mitigation measures. The unexpected risk was the COVID-19 pandemic, which forced the team to work virtually and adjust their implementation strategies when field work was impossible. IDRC granted two extensions, allowing them to complete project activities and milestones.

I would like to highlight how the IDRC's Program officers played a critical role in the project's success by providing regular bi-monthly check-in meetings with the grantee. These meetings were critical to giving immediate feedback rather than waiting until the end of the reporting period. The Responsible Officer's focus on deliverables instead of adherence to pre-defined process details was helpful for this type of action research.

I approve this PCR.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 11 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Santiago Alba-Corral
Director, CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

Click here to enter text.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

CRFS, SIE, Santiago Alba Corral, Erin Tansey, Kathryn Touré, Luisa Solano, Federico Burone, Ida St-Martin, Abel Cheung,

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

Last Revised March 2021
