--- Page 0 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

|  Project Number and Name | Machine Learning for Digital Diagnostics of Antimicrobial Resistance  |
| --- | --- |
|  Responsible Officer | Armando Heriazon  |
|  Former Responsible Officer |   |
|  Principal Investigator | Jie Feng  |
|  Recipient Institution (grantee) | Chinese Academy of Sciences  |
|  Location: Country | China  |
|  Location: Region | Asia  |
|  Area of research impact | Worldwide  |
|  Internal Funding | CRFS  |
|  External Funding |   |
|  Project Start Date | 1 April 2020  |
|  Project Completion Date | 7 September 2023  |
|  Program theme sector | CRFS  |
|  Strategic framework indicator |   |
|  Author | Armando Heriazon  |
|  Date of Report | March 2024  |

## Project Abstract

The discovery of antimicrobial agents was one of the great triumphs of the 20th century. Unfortunately, antibiotic resistance was part of the process as well. If nothing is done by 2050, antimicrobial resistance (AMR) will cost $100 trillion with 10 million people/year expected to die. Factors driving AMR extend beyond human healthcare with implications in veterinary medicine, agriculture, and the environment (the One Health approach). New and improved approaches for tackling AMR include better monitoring, rational drug use, different business model for generating antibiotics, innovation at all levels and most importantly, a global approach. This transnational team grant proposal was tasked to apply new machine learning approaches for modelling AMR for faster diagnosis, better monitoring and prediction of resistance emergence. The initial focus was on two worldwide important pathogens, *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* and *Streptococcus pneumoniae*, that have developed multidrug resistance. Specifically, the research team developed a machine learning implementation that can orient the selection of treatments by assessing the level of resistance, provide rationale for the generation of novel antibiotics, and assist in the surveillance of human and livestock antimicrobial resistance around the globe. To achieve this, scientists assembled a transnational team (Canada, China, Finland, France) with complementary skills and demonstrated expertise in machine learning applied to genomics, metabolomics, and antimicrobial resistance. This multi-country collaboration included China as an LMIC with expertise in the field. Additionally, the use of antimicrobials in China is three times higher than in the Western world and they have access to multiple bacterial isolates that helped advance faster the research. The final product is aimed to be available worldwide, including LMICs.

## PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS

1. What are the five most important results (outputs or outcomes) of this project and how have they been useful or innovative?

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 1 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

The team constructed high quality genotype and antibiotics resistance phenotype datasets for 1312 *Streptococcus pneumoniae* and 172 *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* strains. This is important for research and surveillance purposes.

The team revealed the epidemiological dynamics of multidrug resistant clones for *S. pneumoniae* strains, mainly CC271. The prevalence of ST271 and ST320 were correlated to the use of antibiotics in China and the mass vaccination in other countries.

The team identified a high-risk hypervirulent *P. aeruginosa* that co-carried exoS and exoU genes and its pathogenicity features. The exoS+/exoU+ *P. aeruginosa* could cause both community-acquired infection (CAI) and healthcare-associated infection (HAI). The co-expression and co-secretion of ExoS and ExoU proteins were the main reason for the high virulence. These findings are important for surveillance and for the prediction of outcomes and the development of proper prevention and control measures.

Machine learning prediction models for 8 antibiotics (including Penicillin, Amoxicillin, Cefuroxime, Ceftriaxone, Cefepime, Meropenem, Imipenem, Ciprofloxacin) were constructed based on the genotype and antibiotics resistance phenotype datasets, refining the current prediction strategies. These results help on searching for new antimicrobials, determining the right treatment, and designing strategies to control infectious diseases.

## RESEARCH OUTPUTS

2. List up to 10 most important research outputs generated by the project. Where possible, provide the link.

Outputs are the directly achievable products of a project's completed activities (e.g. policy briefs, journal articles, research papers, trained people, etc.). Indicate the project outputs that were published on an open access basis. What, if any, outputs resulting from this project will be published open access beyond the duration of the project, and it is possible that the grantee will seek further IDRC support for this?

Phylogenomic insights into evolutionary trajectories of multidrug resistant *S. pneumoniae* CC271 over a period of 14 years in China. Genome medicine. 2023 (open access). https://genomemedicine.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13073-023-01200-8

Emergence of hypervirulent *Pseudomonas aeruginosa* pathotypically armed with co-expressed T3SS effectors ExoS and ExoU. hLife. 2023 (open access). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlife.2023.02.001

*Streptococcus sputorum*, a novel member of the *Streptococcus* with multidrug-resistant, exhibits cytotoxicity. Antibiotics. 2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics10121532

Predication of β-lactam resistance phenotype in *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. RAN_one health programme. Workshop - scientists and policy makers. 2021.

Resistance, Exhibits Cytotoxicity. Antibiotics (Basel, Switzerland), 10(12), 1532. 2021. https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics10121532

Two Ph.D students were trained through this project and completed their degree.

3. If appropriate, explain why outputs were not completed or were of poor quality. Provide an explanation of why the project did not create quality outputs. It is not necessary to go through each output of the project.

The research on this project was conducted with diligence and high-quality standards. All milestones were completed as planned. The component of this project is part of a consortium that were supported by different funding agencies as follows: IDRC funded the Chinese Academy of Sciences; Canadian Institutes of Health Research funded Laval University; Academy of Finland funded Aslto University; and French National Research Agency funded Université de Bordeaux. Although each research institution had their own milestones, they all collaborated to complete

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 2 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

diverse work packages. The lead institution for the whole project was Laval University. Collaboration between all institutions was good and it is reflected in the fulfillment of all the milestones. The COVID-19 pandemic affected the activities of all scientists with travel restrictions, access to the research facilities, exchanging of samples, and purchasing of reagents. Despite the slowdown in the research, the teams were able to complete their work with only 6-month no-cost extension.

# PROJECT OUTCOMES

## 4. How does the project contribute to the field of study / research area?

Why was this research important to fund? What were the key scientific findings? What occurred as a result of this project?

Antimicrobial Resistance, at a global level, is a major threat to human and animal health. Antimicrobials play a critical role in treating mostly bacterial diseases in both humans and farm animals. However, the non-prudent use of antimicrobials, in both human and veterinary medicine, are associated with the emergence and spread of antimicrobial-resistant microorganisms (e.g. bacteria) and has been identified as a risk factor for human infectious diseases. This has been evident with the isolation of multi-drug resistant pathogens in hospitals.

The team has generated a wealth of data and resources through this project that scientists will be utilizing for future funding applications. This research contributed to several areas including molecular genetics, pathology, bioinformatics, diagnostics, surveillance, microbiology, and artificial intelligence. All the information generated was fed into the algorithms to predict AMR and evaluate the right course of treatment. The information will also help policymakers and practitioners make informed decisions regarding the use of antimicrobials. Surveillance of pathogens and antimicrobial resistance play an extremely important role for the fast identification and diagnosis of an outbreak and the timely treatment with the right drug.

The team obtained information that was included in two state-of-the-art algorithms that make predictions based on genomic data on the team's datasets (172 P. aeruginosa and 1312 S. pneumoniae strains): 1. Kover that allows the classification of susceptible and resistant strains. 2. XGBoost that allows the prediction of minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values. Since both methods are based on k-mer detection, the team used KMC tool v3.1.1 to split the assembled genomes into k-mers of size 10. For Kover, MIC thresholds for susceptibility and resistance for clinical data and model predictions are based on current Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) breakpoints.

## 5. How would you compare the intended and actual results of the project? Why did it happen that way?

Were there any unintended outcomes of the project? Did the project evolve differently as detailed in the project approval document? Why did the unintended outcomes occur? What was the impact?

The outputs above were of high quality and are commensurate to the purpose and risk level of the first phase of the project. This project generated important information that contributed to scientific knowledge in the areas of bacteriology and AMR, as well as molecular genetics. The knowledge acquired was presented in several conferences that reached students, PIs, and investors from the scientific community. The team also organized workshops to present the technology to scientists and government officials. Contribution of this research helped advance knowledge on AMR in humans. It also helped increase the understanding of the technology and its potential applications in human medicine and possibly, veterinary medicine.

The objectives were ambitious but achievable. There were very few modifications to the milestones, which showed that the expected results were fairly accurate. In order to test the versatility of the model, the team applied the prediction models to other public datasets of S. pneumonia and other

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 3 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

pathogens, such as the closely related species *S. mitis*. And the predictive performance indicated that these models can be extended to other pathogens.

6. How did this project contribute to one or more of IDRC’s strategic objectives?
Refer to the 2015-2020 Strategic Plan if the project was developed and implemented under the old IDRC strategy.
Refer to the 2030 Strategy if the project is developed and implemented under the new IDRC strategy.
Provide specific numbers where possible.

This project tackled an important gap: lack of innovative technological solutions to address some of IDRC’s Development Outcomes. Thus, the project laid the foundation upon which subsequent work could be built to ultimately contribute to IDRC’s Development Outcomes, especially “improving health for all”. This technology addresses improvement of surveillance, which contributes to the improvement of human health, particularly women.

The project also contributed to Build the leaders for today and tomorrow. For example, two PhD students successfully finished their degrees. Additionally, it contributed to the objective “Invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change”. The investment in artificial intelligence as a tool to help in surveillance, design of new antimicrobials, determination of the right treatment and development of policies related to AM use could have a huge impact on both human and animal health.

## 7. OBJECTIVES

Provide a comment only if the objective scored 1 or 2.

Meeting Project Objectives

On a scale of 1 to 4 (1 indicating that the project did not meet the objective and 4 indicating that it fully met the objective), please rate the achievement of each project objective.

General Objective: To develop machine learning implementation that can orient the selection of antimicrobial treatments against human bacterial infections around the globe.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 1: To generate data sets to implement robust machine learning approaches.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Specific Objective 2: To create and validate antimicrobial resistance models using next generation sequencing and metabolite data sets.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 4 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Specific Objective 3: To experimentally validate the models to drive amelioration of the predictive models.

☑ 4 Fully met
☐ 3
☐ 2
☐ 1 Not met

Comment: Click here to enter text.

# FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE

8. Are there any lessons or observations about the granting process, the financial performance of the project, or IDRC's administration of the project that could inform future programming or Centre processes?

The financial performance of the team was good and managed without any problems throughout the funding period. The PI always responded quickly to any clarifications and requests.

This research was a collaborative effort between four institutions located in Canada, Finland, France, and China. The leading researcher is located at Laval University, in Canada, and each institution had clearly outlined the research work and collaboration. A consortium agreement led by Laval University was signed between the partners to standardize methodologies and share data, results, and other information through a science gateway. The consortium agreement is a great tool because it defines roles and responsibilities as well as assigns ownership. Although the artificial intelligence tool was first thought by the Canadian team, the consortium agreement helped define the input from all collaborators. Consortium agreements is a requirement in all JPIAMR calls and should be implemented in IDRC projects.

Overall, the Recipient reported an underspend of the approved project budget by 3.9%. The Recipient reported local contributions for staff time and overhead costs of 990,000 CNY (approximately CAD 187,473).

# STRATEGIC CONSIDERATIONS

9. Were the risk mitigation strategies outlined in the Project Approval Document effective? Were there any unanticipated risks that affected the project?

Several risks were identified before the start of the project that were related to the technology. This technology used a cutting-edge approach to developing a machine learning system that will help monitor bacterial infections and the presence of antimicrobial resistance, as well as provide recommendations for the best available treatment. The main risk is inherent to this type of research since biological systems are hard to predict. Currently there seems to be a lack of understanding of the relationship between the genome of a cell and its phenotype, which is a central problem in precision medicine. Prediction of genotype-phenotype has great challenges for machine learning algorithms that limit their use in this setting. Additionally, most algorithms produce models that are complex and difficult to interpret. To overcome these limitations, the team modified machine-learning algorithms based on the Set Covering Machine. The team also tested two models to prove the reliability of the technology.

One risk that was not originally considered was the COVID-19 pandemic, which impacted mobilization, use of the research facilities, and acquisition of reagents. The whole project was carried on along with the nearly three-year COVID-19 pandemic. The progress was greatly delayed and the performing of some experiments was largely influenced. Thus, the team had to apply for a six-month no-cost extension. Additionally, being also influenced by COVID-19 pandemic, offline international meetings weren't held even for once, which influenced the timely

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 5 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

and effective communication about the program among the researchers from different countries. The teams communicated the details via e-mails or online meeting as frequently as possible to ensure the development for the project.

During the project, the periodic technical reports and financial reports were required to submit through the submission portal of IDRC. However, the website was unavailable to the team, who submitted their reports via email, largely influencing the communication efficiency. Additionally, the exchange rate between the Canadian dollar and the Chinese RMB fluctuated over time, the use of a unified currency unit in the future may help to avoid a deficit.

10. Are there any lessons arising from the assessment and management of research ethics in the project? You may wish to comment on institutional ethics review process efficacy and capacities; institutional and research team ethics oversight throughout the project; ethics training in the project; role of the IDRC program team and ACRE as appropriate; unforeseen ethical issues and how they were managed.

This research fulfilled all the ethical requirements. Therefore, no problems or challenges related to ethics were identified. The teams sent all the ethics approvals for the use of animals on time before any experiment was conducted.

## Program Leader comments

Program Leaders (if project falls under one of the following programs: Animal Health, Climate Resilience, Knowledge and Innovation Exchange, Health Research Partnerships) should provide specific comments on the project, its activities, achievements, and contributions to the program.

This project was one of five IDRC funded projects which were developed through the Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial Resistance (JPIAMR), an international collaborative platform that coordinates global funding to support collaborative research and action on antimicrobial resistance. Through the JPIAMR, IDRC partnered with 18 other donor agencies to fund innovative research projects on diagnostics and surveillance strategies, tools and technologies that could be used to detect and monitor antimicrobial resistance in human, veterinary animal and environmental settings particularly in LMICs. The focus of the call was on diagnostic and surveillance of AMR. As other funders have funded other components of the projects, it would be nice to see how these other components have reached their initial outcome. In addition, IDRC funded another JPIARM call which focused on One health. JPIAMR projects were part of a heavy resource process which we may not want to repeat.

## Director comments

The relevant Program Division or Regional Director should provide specific comments on the project, and to formally approve the report and its contents.

I want to highlight the successful collaboration between transnational teams and this initiative's significant contributions to antimicrobial resistance (AMR). The project, which focused on applying machine learning to model AMR for faster diagnosis and better monitoring, has produced high-quality outputs that align with IDRC's strategic objectives. The project's approach has advanced scientific knowledge in bacteriology and AMR, as well as molecular genetics, and has potential applications in both human and veterinary medicine. This aligns with IDRC's priorities around AMR and the One Health approach, emphasizing the importance of a global strategy to tackle health challenges. The project's achievements in developing predictive models and contributing to surveillance improvements demonstrate a commitment to improving health outcomes worldwide, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. I commend the team's efforts and the project's alignment with IDRC's mission to invest in knowledge and innovation for large-scale positive change.

I approve this PCR

Santiago Alba-Corral

Last Revised March 2021

--- Page 6 ---

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT

IDRC·CRDI

Director CRFS

## Action Items / Next Steps

Click here to enter text.

## Distribution list

Specify individuals with whom this PCR should be shared. At a minimum, the report should be shared with the program team, Director of Program Division, Executive Assistant to the Director of Program Division, relevant Regional Director, Vice-President Programs, Executive Assistant to the Vice-President Programs, Grants Administration Officer, Senior Programs Advisor of Strategy Regions and Policy, Manager for Monitoring Evaluation and Learning

Click here to enter text.

## Notes

- Any key documents can be included as an annex.
- Project completion reports are internal and confidential documents.

Last Revised March 2021
